LEED Certification Guidebook
Process Management Guidebook for
Projects in the District of Columbia

Government of the District of Columbia
Department of Real Estate Services
(Formerly the Office of Property Management)
Published October 2008

The mission of the Department of Real Estate Services (DRES) is to support the District
Government and residents through strategic real estate management, construction and
facilities management. It is compromised of four core divisions:
Construction: The Construction Division strives to support the efficient provision of government services through
high quality and efficient stewardship of constructed assets.
Portfolio: The Portfolio Division seeks to achieve the most efficient use of the District-owned property by
maximizing its application for agency facilities and reducing dependence on leased space.
Facilities: The Facilities Division aims to provide a clean, safe and operational work environment for District
agencies through maintenance, custodial, and repair services.
Protective Services: The Protective Services Division is committed to creating an atmosphere of safety in District
Government facilities to ensure that all government employees and residents may conduct business without fear
of harm.

Purpose
This Guidebook was commissioned by the District of Columbia Department of Real Estate Services (DRES) in order
to assist DRES’s Project Managers as well as external Architecture and Engineering service providers and Contractors
with achieving LEED Certification as required by the District of Columbia Green Building Act. It is intended to provide
guidance, to facilitate the LEED process and to assist project teams in making sound economic and environmental
decisions for LEED projects. It is not intended to replace the LEED Reference Guides, which are all essential tools
when designing and building a project under the LEED Rating System, nor is it intended to replace the services of a
sustainable design consultant, should the project scope or complexity benefit from outside expertise. This Guidebook
is intended to provide greater insight into the LEED process specifically for projects located in the District of Columbia.
The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Rating System was developed by the United States Green
Building Council (USGBC) and the term “LEED” is trademarked. It should not be used to describe projects that are not
Registered with the USGBC, Certified by the USGBC or not intending to pursue LEED Certification. All LEED-related
materials, such as the LEED Reference Guides, are copyrighted and should not be copied or distributed without
permission from the USGBC.
At the time of publication of this Guidebook, the LEED Rating Systems referred to are:
• LEED for New Construction and Major Renovations v2.2
• LEED for Commercial Interiors v2.0
• LEED for Core and Shell v2.0
• LEED for Existing Buildings: Operations and Maintenance
• LEED for Schools
• LEED for Homes
Current LEED Rating Systems will be updated in 2009. All projects registered for LEED with the USGBC before
updated Ratings Systems are released will still be using the Rating Systems listed above, and therefore this Guidebook.
Acknowledgements
This Guidebook was created by Hellmuth, Obata + Kassabaum Architects (HOK) in Washington, DC. The Guidebook
was written in conjunction with the design and implementation of sustainable strategies on the Consolidated Forensic
Lab project, a LEED Registered project managed by the DC Department of Real Estate Services.  © 2008 HOK
Authors and contributors include:
Hellmuth, Obata + Kassabaum Architects (HOK)
Anica Landreneau, LEED-AP, Alesia Call, LEED-AP, Leigh Stringer, LEED-AP, Jodi Williams, LEED-AP, Todd Pedersen,
LEED-AP, Megan Barker, LEED-AP, Danielle Caylor, Niall Cytryn, LEED-AP
Graphics: Jim Doussard, Jeffrey Wotowiec, Kerry Aucamp
Special Thanks to:
Mary Ann Lazarus, LEED-AP, Sara Graham, LEED-AP, Deborah Fuller, LEED-AP, Barb Ciesla, LEED-AP, Keith MacDonald,
LEED-AP, Deborah Rutherford, LEED-AP, Lori Selcer, LEED-AP, Peggy Chu, LEED-AP, Joe Yang, LEED-AP, Dora Ng, LEEDAP, May Xu, LEED-AP
Institute for Market Transformation (IMT)
Cliff Majersik, LEED-AP
District of Columbia Department of Real Estate Services (DRES)
Gerick Smith, Ajay Kapoor, Thom Ennen, Curtis Clay, Brian Hanlon, Allam Al-Alami, Susan Riley, Daphne Hawkins,
Mark Chambers, LEED-AP

LEED Certification | Acknowledgements

4

Table of Contents
1. Introduction.................................................................................................................6
2. 		DC Green Building Act 2006 & DC Clean and Affordable Energy Act 2008
		High Performance Building Standards in the District of Columbia....................................7
3. DC Green Building Code Updates
		Code changes that align with sustainable design and LEED criteria...............................10
4. LEED Rating System Overview.................................................................................14
5. 		The Cost of LEED.......................................................................................................17
6. 		Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase
		LEED Implementation Strategy by Project Phase; useful for Project Managers................20
7. 		LEED Project Management Matrix
		Quick Reference for LEED Milestones and Responsibilities; includes design
		verification submittal requirements to DCRA to obtain building permit........................ 29
8. 		Steps to LEED Certification
Detailed LEED Process Information: when & how to Interact
		with the USGBC and LEED Online; useful for LEED coordinators...................................30
9. Specification Guidance
		How to incorporate LEED Progress Reporting and Documentation Requirements
		into Contract Documents; useful for Owners and Specification Writers.........................49
10. 		LEED General Resources............................................................................................66
11. 		Glossary......................................................................................................................68

Supplemental documents currently available in addition to this Guidebook:
A. 		LEED For New Constructions & Major Renovations v2.2 (LEED-NC)
		Useful for Project design teams and contractors
B. 		LEED For Commercial Interiors v2.0 (LEED-CI)
		Useful for Project design teams and contractors
C. 		DRES LEED Policies
		Useful for all projects under LEED-NC, LEED-CI, LEED-EB, etc.

LEED Certification | Table of Contents

5

Introduction
Title
of Important
Stuff & Things
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
Setting the national standard for high performance
buildings, the District of Columbia passed the Green
Building Act 2006. This legislation is innovative in
its combined mandated and incentivized approach
to green building, as well as its inclusion of both
publicly and privately funded construction and major
renovation projects. Under the Act, publicly owned,
funded or financed projects are required to achieve
sustainable building standards in the LEED and Green
Communities rating systems (though many jurisdictions
already require LEED in the public sector). In addition,
the Act requires LEED Certification for privately funded
construction projects, starting in 2012. DC was the first
jurisdiction to enact legislation that mandates LEED
Certification in the private sector and quickly inspired
similar legislation in other jurisdictions.
Beyond requiring compliance with LEED and Green
Communities, the Green Building Act also requires the
establishment of a green building incentives program,
a Green Building Fund to support incentive programs,
a ‘greening’ of DC building codes, a Green Building
Advisory Council and the priority leasing of green
buildings by the Department of Real Estate Services
(DRES).
Augmenting the Green Building Act of 2006, the
District of Columbia once again set the national
standard for high performance buildings by passing
the Clean and Affordable Energy Act 2008. Among
other requirements, the recently passed Act requires
annual energy performance reporting using the U.S.
Department of Energy’s free, online Energy Star Target
Finder reporting tool. Publicly owned buildings of

10,000 square feet or more must be benchmarked
and reported beginning in 2009 and commercial
properties of 200,000 square feet or more must be
benchmarked and reported beginning in 2010. For
commercial properties, the threshold will lower annually
by 50,000 square feet until 2013, when properties at
50,000 square feet or more must be benchmarked and
reported.
Enforcement of high performance building standards
in the Green Building Act is the responsibility of the
District Department of Consumer and Regulatory
Affairs (DCRA), who will require compliance verification
before issuing building construction permits.
Enforcement of the Energy Star benchmarking and
reporting is the responsibility of the District Department
of the Environment (DDOE). Relevant details of
the Green Building Act of 2006 and the Clean and
Affordable Energy Act of 2008 are explained in more
detail in the next chapter.
The District of Columbia has set the national standard
for State action on reducing greenhouse emissions and
improving the energy efficiency of publicly and privately
sponsored new building construction and major
renovations.
This Guidebook and supplementary manuals were
commissioned by the District Department of Real Estate
Services (DRES), Construction Division, to fortify public
project managers and A/E service providers with the
practical tools to ensure that their projects reach the
goals set by the District.

LEED Certification | Introduction

6

Green
Title
ofBuilding
Important
Act & Clean
StuffAffordable
and
& Things Energy Act
Subtitle
High
Performance
of More Things
Building
andStandards
Stuffs
in the District of Columbia
1. Summary of Mandatory High Performance 		
Building Standards
A. Effective in 2008:

Affairs (DCRA) must submit a LEED Scorecard
with the construction permit application
C. Effective in 2010:

i.		 All publicly funded, financed or owned nonresidential buildings seeking a construction
permit* must achieve certification under one
of the rating systems below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Silver level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Silver level or
higher
c. LEED for Schools (K-12), Certified level or
higher
ii. All publicly funded, financed or owned
residential buildings of 10,000 square feet or
more seeking a construction permit* must
achieve certification under one of the rating
systems below:

i.		 All properties purchased from the District
(or acquired in a transaction where the
District was an instrument of sale) seeking a
construction permit* must achieve certification
under one of the rating systems below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Certified level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Certified level
or higher
ii. All existing commercial properties of 200,000
square feet or more must be benchmarked
annually using the Energy Star Target Finder
tool, and scores must reported to the District
Department of the Environment (DDOE)
D. Effective in 2011:

a. Green Communities 2006
b. LEED for Homes, Silver level or higher
c. LEED for New Construction or Major
Renovations v2.2, Silver level or higher
iii. All tenant improvements of 30,000 square
feet or more in a District-owned building
seeking a construction permit* must achieve
certification under the rating system below:
a. LEED for Commercial Interiors v2.0,
Certified level or higher

i. All existing commercial properties of 150,000
square feet or more must be benchmarked
annually using the Energy Star Target Finder
tool, and scores must reported to the District
Department of the Environment (DDOE)
E. Effective in 2012:
i.		 All privately owned, non-residential buildings
of 50,000 square feet or more seeking a
construction permit* must achieve certification
under one of the rating systems below:

B. Effective in 2009:
i. All existing District owned property of 10,000
square feet or more must be benchmarked
annually using the Energy Star Target Finder
tool, and scores must be reported to the
District Department of the Environment (DDOE)
ii. All privately owned building projects of
50,000 square feet or more seeking a
construction permit* from the District
Department of Consumer and Regulatory

a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Certified level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Certified level
or higher
c. LEED for Schools (K-12), Certified level or higher
ii. All existing commercial properties of 100,000
square feet or more must be benchmarked
annually using the Energy Star Target Finder
tool, and scores must reported to the District
Department of the Environment (DDOE)

LEED Certification Guidebook | Green Building Act & Clean and Affordable
Energy Act

7

F. Effective in 2013:
i. All existing commercial properties of 50,000
square feet or more must be benchmarked
annually using the Energy Star Target Finder
tool, and scores must reported to the District
Department of the Environment (DDOE)
* Construction Permit related LEED Certification
requirements are applicable to all new construction
and substantial improvement projects. ‘Substantial
improvement’ is defined as any scope of work where
the cost of improvements is 50% or more of the
market value of the property prior to its improvements.
2. Summary of Expedited Permitting, as part of
the Green Building Incentives Program
A. Effective in 2009:
i.		 All privately owned, non-residential buildings
seeking Expedited Permitting from the
District Department of Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) must achieve LEED
Certification under one of the rating systems
below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Certified level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Certified level
or higher
c. LEED for Commercial Interiors, Certified
level or higher
d. LEED for Schools, Certified Level or higher

B. Effective in 2012
i.		 All privately owned, non-residential buildings
seeking Expedited Permitting from the
District Department of Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) must achieve LEED
Certification under one of the rating systems
below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Silver level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Silver level or
higher
c. LEED for Commercial Interiors, Silver level
or higher
d. LEED for Schools (K-12), Silver level or
higher
ii. All privately owned, residential buildings
seeking Expedited Permitting from the
District Department of Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) must achieve LEED
Certification under one of the rating systems
below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Silver level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Silver level or
higher
c. LEED for Homes, Silver level or higher
d. Green Communities 2006

ii. All privately owned, residential buildings
seeking Expedited Permitting from the
District Department of Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) must achieve LEED
Certification under one of the rating systems
below:
a. LEED for New Construction & Major
Renovations v2.2, Certified level or higher
b. LEED for Core & Shell v2.0, Certified level
or higher
c. LEED for Homes, Certified level or higher
d. Green Communities 2006

LEED Certification Guidebook | Green Building Act & Clean and Affordable
Energy Act

8

Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DCRA for mandated or expedited green building projects;
all phases must be completed before a permit will be issued.

DCRA Requirements
1. Registration

0%
within 60 days of award

Non‐Residential, Publically Owned, Financed or
Funded Projects/Privately Funded Projects
(Expedited)

Residential, Publically Owned, Financed or
FundedProjects

Subject to LEED Certification Requirements

Subject to Green Communities Requirements

Documents to be submitted to DCRA
1. Receipt from USGBC for LEED Project Registration

2. Integrated Sustainable Design 2. Charrette Agenda, Sign‐in Sheet, Meeting Minutes
Charrette (all disciplines)

Documents to be submitted to DCRA
1. Proof of Green Communities Registration (optional, for
projects seeking grants)
2/3. Preliminary Green Communities Checklist form (This
document contains two tabs; the first tab includes
documentation of an integrated design process and the
second tab identifies how the project will meet the
criteria).

3. Preliminary Sustainable
Design Strategy Evaluation

3. Preliminary LEED Scorecard

4. Public Agency Engagement

4. Meeting schedule and participant list for regular
meetings with relevant agency(ies).
(e.g. OPM, OPEFM, DCPR, etc.)
5a. Updated LEED Scorecard

4. Meeting schedule and participant list for regular
meetings with relevant agency(ies).
(e.g. DCHA, DMPED, DHCD, HFA, etc.)
5a. Updated Green Communities Checklist form.

5b. Preliminary Sustainable Approach Narrative (1‐3
pages)
5c. Schematic drawings (site plan, plan, sections,
elevations) indicating integration of LEED‐compliant
strategies

5b. Preliminary Green Communities Progress Report.

Information Session with DCRA

35%

5. Design Investigation and
Strategy Development

5c. Schematic drawings (site plan, plan, sections,
elevations) indicating integration of Green Communities‐
compliant strategies

Pre‐Development Review Meeting with DCRA
6a. Final LEED Scorecard
6. Confirmed Sustainable Design
Strategy
6b. Final Sustainable Approach Narrative (1‐3 pages)

65%

7a. Revised project drawings demonstrating LEED
requirements are integrated into project design

7. Successful Sustainable Design
Integration
7b. Completed LEED Letter Templates for every
Prerequisite and Credit that will be attempted (and are
listed on the scorecard)
8. Sustainable Design
8. Receipt for submittal of Design Phase Review
Verification
Documents to the USGBC

6a. Final Green Communities Checklist Form
6b. Updated Green Communities Progress Report.
7a. Revised project drawings demonstrating Green
Communities requirements are integrated into project
design.

Pre‐Development Review Meeting with DCRA

95%

9. Sustainable Design
Verification

100%

10. Sustainable Design
Verification

9. Preliminary Design Phase Review, issued by USGBC OR
DCRA LEED Scorecard indexed to supporting plans,
specifications and additional documents demonstrating
compliance with LEED criteria
10. Final Design Phase Review, issued by USGBC

9. DCRA Green Communities Checklist Form, indexed to
supporting plans, specifications and additional
documents demonstrating compliance with Green
Communities criteria.
10. DCRA approved Green Communities Checklist Form
and Final Green Communities Progress Report.

Complete Project Permit Set is Submitted
Recommended Owner
Requirements

Within 60 days
11. Construction Phase
of Contract
Compliance Verification
Award

Monthly

12. Construction Phase
Compliance Verification

Recommended Documents to be submitted to Owner by
the General Contractor
11a. Copy of LEED‐AP Certificate for General Contractor's
on‐site LEED documentation coordinator
11b. LEED Kick‐off meeting (agenda, sign‐in sheet)
11c. Construction Waste Management Plan
11d. Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
12. General Contractor's LEED documentation with
signed, completed cover sheet

Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is Issued
OPM/DCRA/DDOE
Requirements

Completion

13. Sustainable Construction
Verification

Documents to be submitted to OPM, DCRA & DDOE
13a. Construction Phase Review, issued by USGBC
13b. Final LEED Certification Award, issued by USGBC

Documents to be submitted to DCRA & DDOE
13. Final, approved Green Communities compliance
workbook (all disciplines).

Final Certificate of Occupancy is Issued; Bond is Returned (for Expedited Projects)
LEED Certification Guidebook | Green Building Act & Clean and Affordable
Energy Act

9

DC Green
Title
of Important
Building
Stuff &
Code
Updates
Things
Subtitle
Code
Changes
of More
that
Things
Alignand
with
Stuffs
LEED Criteria
DC Government projects are subject to the same DC
building code requirements as all other projects in DC.1
DC is in the process of updating its building codes for
the first time since 2003. As with codes already in place
in many jurisdictions (including Maryland and Virginia),
DC’s new codes will be based on the International Code
Council’s 2006 family of International Building Codes
(the 2006 “I-codes”) with local amendments. The DCspecific amendments are titled the “DC Construction
Code Supplement Of 2008” and are contained in
“DCMR 12.”
DC’s Green Building Act (GBA) requires the Mayor to
“submit to the Council for approval construction code
revisions that shall incorporate as many green building
practices as practicable…”
Washington DC has been a leader2 in pushing for
a 30% improvement in building energy codes. The
proposed codes require that low-rise residential
buildings be 30% more energy efficient than permitted
by the 2006 I-codes and will likely require the same for
all other buildings.3
A package of green building code amendments
based on best practices from around the country
was developed for DC in a process led by the District
Department of the Environment (DDOE), its contractors,
the Green Building Advisory Council (GBAC),
Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
(DCRA) and a wide group of stakeholders including the
Department of Real Estate Services (DRES), developers,
builders, architects, and engineers. DCRA included most
of the package in its proposed DC Construction Code
Supplement of 2008 submitted to the City Council
in June 2008. Councilmember Mary Cheh chairs the
relevant committee ofthe DC Council. On July 11,
Councilmember Cheh’s Committee reported the codes
up to the full DC Council. The codes were passed in
December 2008.

The new building code will become mandatory
December of 2009. Building designers will be able to
choose to use either DC’s new or old building codes for
building permit applications submitted during the one
year transition period following the new code’s
adoption.
As of December, 2009, all permit applications will be
subject to new code requirements.
1. Proposed code changes reduce code 		
impediments to green building
The proposed codes permit (without need for a waiver)
the following green building practices for which a
waiver is required under the current codes:
1.
2.
3.
		
		
		

Waterless urinals
Polypropylene pipes
Base outside air ventilation rates on actual indoor
air quality measurements (i.e. use of carbon
dioxide monitoring) or sophisticated models that
account for occupancy, filtering and off-gassing.

The proposed codes also make it easier to disconnect
downspouts to enable on-site retention of stormwater
by removing the requirement for a master plumber.
In fact, building codes in DC and across the US already
permit most green building materials and practices.
Unfortunately, the building permitting process has long
created impediments to green building. Most of these
impediments were not due to the codes themselves,
but to a lack of familiarity with green building on the
part of some code officials, designers, trades people,
builders, and others who believed that certain green
building practices and materials were not permitted by
building codes or who feared that inclusion of green
building elements would delay the permitting process.4

To be eligible for expediting permitting as authorized by the Green Building Act (GBA) projects which the GBA already requires to achieve LEED Certification must
achieve a higher LEED level (i.e. Silver, Gold or Platinum) than the level required for private projects.
www.ddoe.dc.gov/ddoe/cwp/view,a,11,q,497577,ddoeNav_GID,1458.asp
3
See www.imt.org/codes/ for updates.
4
For instance, some incorrectly believed that codes prohibit piping of rainwater or greywater into a building, when in fact such piping is permitted for flushing toilets
and irrigation so long as precautions like backflow preventers are employed to prevent mixing with upstream potable water.
1

2

LEED Certification | DC Green Building Code Updates

10

Fortunately, the design and construction communities are rapidly embracing green building. DCRA is committed to
providing education and training to its plan reviewers and inspectors on green building practices. Though there is
much work to do, DCRA has already made great progress. For instance, DCRA quickly and routinely grants waivers
for waterless urinals and one particular LEED platinum project received permits in less than 30 days – far faster than
traditional projects, which is was great advantage for the builder.
2. Proposed DC codes’ Green Building Requirements
The proposed codes mandate these new green building practices:
A. Water Efficiency
Improve water efficiency by requiring low-flow plumbing fixtures. Faucets, flush fixtures and shower fixtures
will contribute to one or more LEED water efficiency Credits through a combination of uses. Use of all required
fixtures should approximate 40% water savings from the LEED baseline (Energy Policy Act of 1992), or 3 Credits
in LEED-NC v2.2.
New DC low-flow plumbing requirements summary:
PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING

MAXIMUM FLOW RATE OR QUANTITY

Lavatory, private

1.5 gpm at 60psi

Lavatory, public, (metering)

0.25 gallon per metering cycle

Lavatory, public (other than metering)

0.5 gpm at 60 psi

Showerhead

2.0 gpm at 80psi

Sink faucet

2.2 gpm at 60 psi

Urinal

0.5 gallon per flushing cycle

Water closet

1.28 gallons per flushing cycle
OR
Dual flush valve at 1.6/1.1gallons per flush

B. Cool Roofs
75% or more of the area of flat roofs must be cool roofs, lime-stone ballasted or green roofs.5 These roofs are
eligible for the LEED Sustainable Sites Credit “Urban Heat Island, Roof”. Green roofs are eligible for several
additional LEED Sustainable Sites Credits including “Stormwater Design, Quantity Control”; “Stormwater
Design, Quality Control”; “Site Development, Protect & Restore Habitat”; “Site Development, Maximize Open
Space”; and through selective use of vegetation materials, may also contribute to Water Efficiency Credits.
SECTION 1511A COOL ROOF REQUIREMENTS
Roof coverings for roof slopes less than or equal to two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope or
less) for buildings and covered parking shall conform to the this section. A minimum of 75% of the entire roof
surface not used for roof penetrations, renewable energy power systems (e.g. photovoltaics or solar thermal
collectors), harvesting systems for rainwater to be used on-site, or green roofing systems shall be covered with
products that comply with one or more of the following:
(a) Have a minimum initial SRI6 of 78.
(b) Comply with the criteria for the U.S. EPA’s Energy Star Program Requirements for Roof Products – Eligibility
			 Criteria.
www.imt.org/codes/codes.doc
Solar Reflective Index. The solar reflective index (SRI) shall be calculated in accordance with ASTM E1980 for medium-speed wind conditions. The
SRI shall be based upon solar reflectance as measured in accordance with ASTM E1918 or ASTM C1549, and the thermal emittance as measured in
accordance with ASTM E408 or ASTM C1371. For roofing products, the values for solar reflectance and thermal emittance shall be determined by a
laboratory accredited by a nationally recognized accreditation organization, such as the Cool Roof Rating Council CRRC-1 Product Rating Program,
and shall be labeled and certified by the manufacturer.

5
6

LEED Certification | DC Green Building Code Updates

11

Exceptions to cool roof requirements:
1. Building projects where an annual energy analysis
simulation demonstrates that the total annual
building energy cost and total annual CO2e, as
calculated in accordance with ASHRAE Standard
189.1 7.5.2 and 7.5.3, are both 2% less for the
proposed roof than with a roof with an initial SRI
of 78.
2. Roofs used to shade or cover parking and
roofs over semi-heated spaces or used as outdoor
recreation space by the occupants of the building
shall be permitted to be either landscaped or have
a minimum initial SRI of 29. A default SRI value of
35 for new concrete without added color pigment
is allowed to be used in lieu of measurements.
3. Terraces on setbacks comprising less than 25% of
the area of the largest floor plate in the building.
4. Roofs ballasted at a minimum weight of 17
pounds per square foot with limestone or a
ballast with a solar reflectance of at least 30%
shall be permitted to comprise part or all of the
75% required area coverage.
5. Green roofs shall be permitted to comprise part
or all of the 75 percent required area coverage.

C. Ventilation and Exhaust
Prohibit recirculation of air vented from bathrooms
and kitchens.
D. Energy Efficiency
Commercial buildings will need to meet ASHRAE
90.1 as demonstrated by energy modeling or
achieving advanced prescriptive energy efficiency
guidelines.
Meeting new higher DC energy code requirements
will help to earn points under LEED-NC v2.2
Energy and Atmosphere Credit 1: Optimize Energy
Performance.
Buildings whose energy models demonstrate at least
28% greater energy efficiency than ASHRAE 90.1
2004 are eligible for 6 LEED points under Energy and
Atmosphere Credit 1: Optimize Energy Performance;
achieving 31.5% better than ASHRAE 90.1 2004 is
eligible for 7 LEED points under the same Credit.
As an alternative to energy modeling, the proposed
codes give several prescriptive alternatives. These
are acceptable for LEED Prerequisite compliance and
LEED Credits, where applicable, and are available
online:
• Buildings less than 100,000 square feet
shall have the alternative option to meet the
requirements of the New Building Institute Core
Performance Guide.
•

Office buildings less than 20,000 square feet
shall have the alternative option to meet the
requirements of the ASHRAE Advanced Energy
Design Guide for Small Office Buildings (30%).
FREE: www.ashrae.org/aedg

•

Retail buildings less than 20,000 square feet
shall have the alternative option to meet the
requirements of the ASHRAE Advanced Energy
Design Guide for Small Retail Building (30%).
FREE: www.ashrae.org/aedg

•

K-12 Schools shall have the alternative option to
meet the requirements of the ASHRAE Advanced
Energy Design Guide for K-12 School Buildings
(30%). FREE: www.ashrae.org/aedg

•

Warehouses and Self Storage buildings less than
50,000 square feet shall have the alternative
option to meet the requirements of The ASHRAE
30% Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small
Warehouses and Self Storage Buildings.
FREE: www.ashrae.org/aedg

LEED Certification | DC Green Building Code Updates

12

Benchmarking DC’s New Building Codes
The Architecture 2030 Challenge calls for an immediate
50% reduction in the fossil fuel consumption of new
buildings, compared with a baseline drawn from the
2003 Commercial Building Energy Consumption Survey
(CBECS) for commercial buildings and Residential
Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) for residential
buildings.
The chart above shows the alignment of a 50%
reduction with the ASHRAE standards referenced in
both LEED and DC building codes. For example, new
buildings seeking Certification under LEED-NCv2.2
must come in 30% below the ASHRAE 90.1-2004
standard to meet the Architecture 2030 Challenge. A
project achieving this reduction will be compliant with
DC’s updated energy performance requirements and
will also earn 6 points in Energy & Atmosphere Credit
1: Optimize Energy Performance, in the LEED-NCv2.2
rating system.

DC Building code updates that would mandate
compliance with the ASHRAE 90.1-2007 standard for
energy efficiency are currently under evaluation by
the District Council. This standard will also meet the
Architecture 2030 goals for immediate reduction of
50%.
Read about the Architecture 2030 Challenge here:
www.architecture2030.org
U.S. Mayors Climate Protection Agreement, signed by
Washington, DC: www.usmayors.org/climateprotection/
agreement.htm

LEED Certification | DC Green Building Code Updates

13

LEEDof
Title
Rating
Important
System
Stuff & Things
Overview
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
Understanding Challenges and Opportunities with
Using LEED in the District of Columbia
The LEED Rating Systems are intended to be
challenging in order to advance better design and
construction practices. The Rating Systems are
periodically updated to ‘raise the bar’ as the industry
catches up to these practices and as environmental
challenges continue to grow. Although LEED
Certification is not intended to be easy, it is also not
intended to be prohibitive, costly or to be impossible
to achieve. Design and construction teams will have
to work harder to create better buildings and must be
willing to try new materials, products and methods.
LEED is readily achievable when teams initiate the
discussion early, establish clear goals and organize the
project in accordance with the LEED process.
The District of Columbia is well located to benefit
from many green building resources, from products to
services. By being an early adopter, DC has grown a
wealth of professional services and construction firms
that are savvy to green building practices. These skills,
in addition to other local resources, are available to your
LEED project. In addition, LEED rewards density, urban
infill and re-development projects, which are all typical
project attributes in the District. By nature of location,
DC projects have access to numerous strategies and
LEED Credits at little to no cost. It is entirely reasonable
to pursue and achieve LEED Silver or a higher level of
Certification in the District.

How was LEED created?
Many LEED-novices are under the impression that the
USGBC is a government agency. This is not correct.
The USGBC is a non-profit organization dedicated
to encouraging healthier buildings and advancing
the sustainable building industry. It is a good idea
to visit the USGBC website (www.usgbc.org) to get
the full story, however it is important to understand
that the LEED Rating Systems were all developed
by professionals like you: Architects, Engineers,
Developers, Contractors, Owners, Designers, Product
Manufacturers, etc. It was designed by your peers who do understand the difficulties of adopting new
practices – to be challenging, but fair and practical.
Each section in the LEED Rating Systems was developed
and is maintained by Technical Advisory Groups (TAGs)
that are comprised of USGBC members. Improvements
are made periodically and new releases of the Rating
Systems are posted in draft form on the USGBC website
with public comment periods open to everyone.
Comments are reviewed and responded to by the TAGs.
New versions of the LEED Rating Systems are only
released after USGBC members vote on it. Essentially,
your peers developed it and continue to improve upon
it, with the help of LEED stakeholders like you.

Furthermore, DC building codes have been recently
updated to require many measures that inherently
meet or exceed LEED requirements. Therefore a legally
compliant project will automatically meet many LEED
criteria, though proper documentation will still be
required to achieve LEED Credits and Prerequisites, and
ultimately Certification. DC building code changes are
summarized in the DC Green Building Code Updates
chapter and will be correlated in relevant chapters
throughout the Guidebook.
Note: Throughout this Guidebook, terms in BOLD will
be defined in context as well as in the Glossary.

LEED Certification | LEED Rating System Overview

14

How does the LEED Rating System work?
There are many rumors and myths about LEED. For
example, critics often suggest that it is too difficult,
it reduces sustainable design to mere checklists, it is
overly structured and it is too limiting of creativity. This
is not the case!
First, there are many benefits to LEED, which is why it
is required and incentivized by the District and many
jurisdictions, nationaly and globally. LEED offers true
third-party verification of design and construction. In
the absence of LEED, a project team designs a ‘green’
building and a construction company builds it. The
public and most importantly, the Owner, have no way
of knowing if a project has been ‘green-washed’ or
if it is truly a sustainable project. Without measuring
performance against some baseline and without
clear metrics, how can we identify which projects are
green, or answer the question, “how green is it?”
Without verification, an Owner has no way of really
knowing if they are truly getting the high-performance
building that they have invested in. LEED brings value
to sustainable and green building in a many ways. In
particular, LEED:
•

Creates market demand, increasing availability
of products, materials, technologies and labor
while bringing costs down

•

Creates a common language to facilitate the
discussion around sustainable building

•

Creates common metrics so that performance
can be measured and verified

•

Creates clear performance thresholds so that
projects can pursue environmental goals and
levels of LEED Certification appropriate for the
project budget, schedule and program

•

Verifies design and construction practices with
third party reviews

Second, LEED is actually quite flexible if project
teams understand how it works. The Rating
System is comprised of a set of Prerequisites and
Credits, organized into specific categories. While all
Prerequisites must be achieved for a project to be
eligible for LEED Certification, not all Credits have to
be attained. It is important that project teams identify
those Credits that make the most sense for a specific
project. It is okay to opt not to pursue certain Credits if
they are not practical for the project budget, schedule
or program.

Every Prerequisite and Credit has an ‘intent’. Typically
there are multiple paths towards achievement called
‘compliance paths’. The intent is very important,
because sometimes a project’s unique circumstances
make it seem as though the project is not eligible for a
LEED Credit.
Project teams may be able to develop an alternative
compliance path that is not described in the LEED
Rating System, however it may meet the intent of
the Credit nonetheless. If this is the case, there are
opportunities to be creative within the LEED process.
When project teams are in this situation, there is
an avenue to pursue a Credit under an alternative
approach: Credit Interpretation Requests (CIRs) and
Rulings. The project team bears the ‘burden of proof’
and must make a legitimate case that the proposed
alternative compliance path meets the intent and
shows clear and quantifiable environmental benefit.
There are instructions for the Credit Interpretation
Request process on the USGBC website (www.usgbc.
org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=168&).
Third, LEED is not intended to be the beginning or the
end of sustainable design. It is not intended to limit the
progress of greener design or to represent all facets of
sustainability. It is intended to provide a manageable
framework that helps bring the building industry
forward and improves baseline building practices.
Project teams should not feel as though a sustainable
strategy is not worth pursuing just because a LEED
Credit is not awarded for that strategy.
LEED does have limitations, and green strategies that
make sense for a particular project should be pursued
on their own merit. However, LEED also provides
opportunities for Innovation and Design (the last
section in every LEED Rating System). Although there
are many pre-approved compliance paths for achieving
Credits in this section, every project team is encouraged
to develop new strategies that can demonstrate clear
environmental benefit. These new strategies can be
verified through the CIR process described above, or
submitted with normal Credit documentation where
feedback and opportunities to refine the approach will
be given.

LEED Certification | LEED Rating System Overview

15

Which LEED Rating System is right for your
project?
LEED for New Construction and Major Renovations
(LEED-NC v2.2)
• Any size
• Commercial or Multi-family Residential
• New buildings, where more than 50% of the
interior is built out
• Renovations involving HVAC, envelope, and/or
major interior rehabilitation
• Renovations where more than 50% of
occupants must relocate
• Change in occupancy type
LEED for Commercial Interiors (LEED-CI) v2.0
• Any size
• New interior build-outs
• Major interior rehabilitation
• Renovations to whole building that do not
significantly address HVAC or envelope
• Tenant scope
LEED for Core and Shell (LEED-CS) v2.0
• Any size
• New buildings
• Speculative office buildings
• New buildings, where less than 50% of the
interior is built out
• Major renovation to HVAC, envelope, but not
interiors
LEED for Schools
• K-12 education facilities (required)
• Higher education facilities (recommended)
LEED for Existing Buildings: Operations & Maintenance
• Buildings two years old or more
• Minor renovations
• Changes in operations & maintenance policies
LEED for Homes
• Single Family or Multi-family Residential
• Market rate

LEED Certification | LEED Rating System Overview

16

The Cost
Title
of Important
of LEED
Stuff & Things
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
The Cost of LEED

LEED Registration Fees

USGBC:
Registration
The costs to
pursue LEED Certification will vary from
project to project. The following information provides
a summary of current LEED Certification costs, typical
construction cost premiums and typical soft costs. This
is not a guarantee that a specific project’s sustainable
design or construction costs will match those shown
here. This information is provided to give guidance and
Certification Fees
aCertification
startingFees
point for project budgeting.

Pageand
1 ofare
1
(All fees are subject to change, per the USGBC,
non-refundable)
Project Registration may only be completed online.
Please note that Registration is different than
Certification. Registration should occur at the beginning
of a project and it is a fixed fee.

Less than 50,000
Square Feet

More than
50,000-500,000
500,000 Square
Square Feet
Feet

Fixed Rate

Based on
Sq. Ft.

Fixed Rate

Members

$1,250.00

$0.025/
Square
Foot

$12,500.00

Non-Members

$1,500.00

$0.03/
Square
Foot

$15,000.00

Members

$500.00

$0.01/
Square
Foot

$5,000.00

Non-Members

$750.00

$0.015/
Square
Foot

$7,500.00

Members

$1,750.00

$0.035/
Square
Foot

$17,500.00

Non-Members

$2,250.00

$0.045/
Square
Foot

$22,500.00

Fixed Rate

Based on
Sq. Ft.

Fixed Rate

Members

$1,250.00

$0.025/
Square
Foot

$12,500.00

Non-Members

$1,500.00

$0.03/
Square
Foot

$15,000.00

LEED for: New Construction, Commercial
Interiors, Core and Shell, and Schools
Design Review

Registration Fees:
• Members $450.00
• Non-Members $600.00
LEED for Existing Buildings:
Registration fees are waived for
buildings pursuing LEED-EB if they
have received LEED Certification
for New Construction, Core and
Shell, or Schools under the USGBC
Rating Systems.

Construction Review

Combined Design & Construction Review

LEED for Existing Buildings
Initial Certification Review

Note: All fees are subject to change. Sorry, no refunds.

LEED Registration and Certification Fees

Special Certification Fees for Projects Registered Between 2002 and 2005*

LEED Certification | The Cost of LEED

17

LEED Certification Fees

Hard Costs

Updated information is always available on the
USGBC’s website: www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.
aspx?CMSPageID=65

• The cost per square foot for buildings seeking
LEED certification falls into the existing range of
costs for buildings of similar program types.7

Certification is a process that concludes at the end
of design and construction phases, when the team
submits all LEED Letter Templates and documentation.
This fee is based on square footage.

• The construction cost premium for most green
buildings falls within 2%.8 LEED Certified level
projects incur about 1% cost premium.9 Green
buildings can achieve LEED Silver (and occasionally
Gold) levels for cost increase of less than 2.5%.10

LEED for Existing Buildings Recertification Fees:
Existing Building recertification fees are 50% of the
fee shown above for EB initial certification. This fee is
due when the customer submits the application for
recertification review.
LEED for Core & Shell Precertification Fees
Fixed Rates:
i) Members $2500.00
ii) Non-Members $3500.00
Platinum Certification Rebates: Projects that are
awarded LEED platinum certification will receive a
rebate for all certification fees. The rebate applies to
projects that certify using LEED for New Construction,
LEED for Existing Buildings, LEED for Commercial
Interiors, LEED for Core & Shell, or LEED for Schools.
Projects that certify under future versions of LEED
(excluding pilot projects and LEED for Homes projects)
will also be eligible.
Registration fees, appeal review fees, and any
additional fees required to expedite LEED certification
will not be refunded.
Expedited Certification: Project teams may seek
expedited reviews at $5000 per phase (i.e. Design
Phase Review or Construction Phase Review). This is
not guaranteed – the team must propose an expedited
review timeline (based on the USGBC outline for
expedited reviews) and this fee is charged in addition to
normal certification fees. It is a flat fee.

• New green building costs ranged from 0.4%
reduction to 8.1% increase dependant on LEED
level achieved. Major renovation costs ranged
from 1.4% to 7.8% increase, depending on LEED
level achieved.11
• Water Efficiency: Water efficient fixtures range
from no-added cost to $100-200 upcharge
for ultra low flush and water free fixtures. By
reducing water and sewer costs, these fixtures
usually pay for themselves in 9 months - 1 year.
• Green Power: Green-e Certified Renewable
Energy Credits (RECs) can be found for as little
as $0.05 per kWh. For projects that do not have
direct access to green power through their local
utilities, this is a very affordable option. There is
no direct payback, however there are considerable
implications for company image.
• Green Building Materials (e.g. recycled content,
regional, rapidly renewable, low-emitting): These
can often be incorporated at zero to minimal
added construction cost, however there may be
documentation costs if a project pursues LEED. No
added Urea-formaldehyde composite wood and
certified wood are exceptions. These materials
may incur up to a 10% premium and cost
depends upon availability.
• Increased Ventilation: This adds little
construction cost, but can add significantly to cost
of operations if natural ventilation or operable
windows are not employed, particularly if the
outside air temperature or humidity is significantly
different from indoor conditions. Increased
operations costs can be offset by energy recovery
systems.

Langdon, Davis “Costing Green: A Comprehensive Cost Database and Budgeting Methodology” July, 2004 | http://www.davislangdon.com/USA/
Research/ResearchFinder/2004-Costing-Green-A-Comprehensive-Cost-Database-and-Budgeting-Methodology
8
Kats, Greg “The Costs and Financial Benefits of Green Buildings” October, 2003 | http://www.usgbc.org/Docs/News/News477.pdf
9
“Building for Sustainability” - Study for David and Lucille Packard Foundation Los Altos Project, October 2002 | http://www.hpsarch.com/
careers/2002-Matrix.pdf
10
Steven Winters Associates “GSA LEED Cost Study” October, 2004 |
11
IBID
7

LEED Certification | The Cost of LEED

18

• Lighting Controls: Individual lighting controls
can be most cost-effectively incorporated into
system furniture task lighting. Daylight harvesting
controls typically average $100/fixture and pay for
themselves in 1-3 years.
• Thermal Comfort Controls: Individual thermal
comfort controls can be most cost-effectively
incorporated into underfloor air distribution and
operable windows; increased VAV distribution can
incur greater cost with fewer benefits.
Soft Costs
• 3rd Party LEED project management: LEED
consulting typically starts around $40,00060,000 through project certification, but will vary
depending on the building size, complexity of
scope, level of LEED certification targeted, level
of LEED experience among disciplines and the
construction team, and difficulty of integrating
LEED into the project process. Starting early (in
pre-design or schematic design) can help keep
the LEED management fees under control. The
later the process starts, the more difficult it is to
manage the process.
• Energy Modeling: Depending on the project size
and project scope, energy modeling (using DOE2,
eQUEST or Trane Trace) typically starts around
$20,000. All LEED projects must show compliance
with LEED energy performance criteria. Smaller
projects should consider using the prescriptive
compliance path options, instead of energy
modeling (explained in the DC Green Building
Code Updates chapter as well as the LEED-NC
supplemental guide).

• Enhanced Commissioning: Enhanced Cx
typically adds an additional $1.00-2.00/sf.12 This is
an additional Credit that is optional.
Whole building commissioning can also be
estimated at 1-2% of total construction costs.
Interior build-outs may only include lighting
controls and be much less costly. With an
average of 18% energy savings from building
commissioning, this service typically pays for itself
in 1-5 years.13
• LEED Documentation: the true cost of
documentation is not in the paper work, it is in
the enhanced level of design and in the ongoing
design verification process. Some A/E firms
will charge a ‘documentation’ fee. Others will
charge a ‘sustainable design’ fee. Some firms will
not charge a fee at all, as they already strive to
incorporate sustainability into common practice.
Regardless of what the additional fee is called,
it is usually reflective of a more integrated and
iterative design process, where the design and
ultimate building performance is enhanced by a
feedback loop. Once the design is verified against
LEED performance criteria, the documentation
process merely requires that the team upload
copies of the drawings and calculations.
Fees for LEED documentation will vary based on
the following:
• Project scope
• Project complexity
• LEED experience level of the team (A/E firms)
• Phase at which LEED is initiated
• Level of certification targeted

• Fundamental Commissioning: Fundamental Cx
may cost $1.50-3.00/sf for comprehensive
building systems. This is a Prerequisite and must
be included in all LEED projects.

Langdon, Davis “Cost of Green Revisited: Reexamining the Feasibility and Cost Impact of Sustainable Design in the Light of Increased Market
Adoption” July, 2007
13
Mills, Ethan, et al “The Cost-Effectiveness of Commercial-Building Commissioning” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Dec. 2004 | eetd.lbl.
gov/emills/PUBS/Cx-Costs-Benefits.html
12

LEED Certification | The Cost of LEED

19

Managing
Title
of Important
LEED Certification
Stuff
by
Project
& Things
Phase
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
The LEED Certification process is fairly accommodating
of project schedules, however this Guidebook provides
recommendations for successfully managing the
process in an efficient and economical manner. A
matrix outlining LEED steps, milestones, responsibilities
and roles is provided in this Guidebook. Wherever
possible, requirements and procedures specific to the
DC Department of Real Estate Services (DRES), the
DC Department of the Environment (DDOE) and the
DC Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
(DCRA) which are relevant to LEED are incorporated
into this matrix. Unique projects may need to adjust
this timeline as well as roles and responsibilities to
accommodate specific project needs.
1. Getting Started
Sustainable design and LEED requirements are most
efficient and economical to integrate into a project if
the process begins early. Many project teams unfamiliar
with LEED will delay the onset of the process, fearing
it will adversely impact a project schedule. In actuality,
putting off the discussion about sustainable design and
LEED goals is inefficient and often results in burdening
a project schedule and budget if the issue is discussed
too late in the design process. Ideally, sustainable
design and LEED requirements are integrated early on
into the project design process rather than added on at
the end.

2. Planning/Pre-design
The best time to initiate the LEED discussion is
before the project is awarded. When responding to a
Request for Proposal (RFP), developing a proposal or
Statement of Intent or describing a project approach
and preparing for an interview, it is a good idea to
have had at least one discussion or meeting among
known team members (e.g. Architects, Civil Engineers,
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing (MEP) Engineers,
Landscape Architects) around sustainability and LEED. In
this way, the team can consider special site conditions
and programmatic considerations, outline a strategy
and be prepared to start the project off on the right
foot when it is awarded. For example, simple design
decisions about building orientation and massing
may have tremendous impact on the ultimate energy
performance of the building. These decisions can be
made in a timely and cost effective manner if they are
addressed before the building is already designed. This
initial pre-award meeting can be a conference call, an
in-person meeting or even a mini-charrette. Including a
‘sustainable design approach’ narrative in your proposal
can go a long way toward convincing DRES that the
team understands the LEED requirements inherent in
the project scope.
Once the project is awarded, there are key activities
that will help a project get started on the right foot.

Although there are recommended timeframes for
completing each of the steps outlined in this chapter,
it is important to note that every single one of these
steps must be completed to achieve certification, with
the exception of Precertification which is optional and
available to LEED for Core & Shell projects only.
If the project team starts to implement LEED in a later
phase than indicated in this overview, the team simply
must perform the steps in a subsequent phase.

LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

20

B. Register the Project with the USGBC

A. Designate a LEED Coordinator
It is important that the project team designate a
LEED Coordinator, someone who can manage
the process and keep all team members on track
throughout the project. Although many project
teams elect to hire a third-party sustainable
design consultant for this role, it is not always
necessary if there is a team member with some
LEED experience under their belt. This Guidebook
will use the term ‘LEED Coordinator’ in reference
to either an internal or external (third-party) LEED
Coordinator or green building consultant.

Once the LEED Coordinator has been designated
it is essential to register the project for LEED
Certification with the USGBC as soon as feasible.
Registration takes only a few minutes, requires
very little information about location, size, budget
and scope (all of which can be modified at a later
date if necessary) and currently costs only $450
for USGBC members or $600 for non-members.
Find out if your firm is a USGBC member before
registering the project so that the discount is
given.

At a minimum, a LEED Coordinator should be a
LEED Accredited Professional (LEED-AP) so
that there is a working knowledge of the Rating
System and the Certification process. If the project
is particularly complex, the scope is extensive, or
there are unusual budget or schedule constraints,
a third party consultant may well be a good
investment to ensure that the project achieves its
goals.

DRES projects may be able to register with the
District’s USGBC membership if the project team
does not already include any USGBC members.

If the project team does not include any LEEDAPs, then a third party consultant may also be
a particularly valuable asset as they can coach
the team through the process and all team
members will be more knowledgeable and better
prepared for subsequent LEED projects. Third
party consultants generally work on a great
number and variety of LEED projects and are able
to bring a wealth of experience to the table. On
the other hand, if the project team designates an
internal team member as the LEED Coordinator,
it is important that the LEED Coordinator
has dedicated time for managing the LEED
Certification process.

Early registration is very important because the
rating system is updated periodically, usually
becoming more stringent. Registering a project
early (recommended in Schematic Design phase)
ensures that the project will retain eligibility for
the current LEED Rating System – the one under
which it is designed. If the Rating System changes
while a project is in design or construction
and the project is not registered, it can lose its
eligibility if it does not meet the newer LEED
standards.
Remember, it only takes a few minutes and $450
to preserve eligibility.
See the Steps to LEED Certification Chapter for
detailed instructions on Project Registration.

Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DCRA in this phase; all phases must be completed
before a permit will be issued. DRES project teams must submit duplicate copies of all documents to DRES.

Non- Residential, Publicly Owned, Financed or
Funded Projects/Privately Funded Projects
(Expedited)
Subject to LEED Certiﬁcation Requirements
DCRA Requirements

0%
within 60 days of award

Reside

Subj

Documents to be submitted to DCRA

1. Registration

1. Receipt from USGBC for LEED Project Registration

2. Integrated Sustainable Design
Charrette (all disciplines)

2. Charrette Agenda, Sign-in Sheet, Meeting Minutes

3. Preliminary Sustainable Design
Strategy Evaluation

3. Preliminary LEED Scorecard

D

1. Proof of Gr
projects seek
2/3. Prelimina
document con
documentatio
second tab id

Information Session with DCRA
LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

21

3. Schematic Design
It is most efficient and economical to establish clear
LEED goals and strategies as early as possible in the
design process. In this way, sustainable design elements
are integrated into the design from its inception
rather than becoming additive or reactive features. It
is especially important to your construction budget
that LEED requirements not engender change orders
because they were not addressed soon enough.
In some cases, sustainable strategies with perceived
first-costs may be offset immediately by savings. For
example, a vegetated (green) roof may incur a cost
premium above a typical roofing material, but may
preclude the necessity for structural stormwater
management. So while it appears on the surface
to add to the cost of a project, there may be an
immediate economic benefit to this strategy. This
strategy and others will be discussed in more detail,
but it is important to note that early discussions about
sustainable design usually result in a more economical
LEED strategy.
Key steps to LEED management in the schematic design
phase include:
A. Hold a Sustainable Design Charrette
Once a LEED Coordinator or sustainable design
consultant has been designated, and the project
design has begun, it is important to hold a
Sustainable Design Charrette. This is an
all-team meeting that typically takes 4-8 hours
(duration may vary, depending on the needs of
the project). It should include at a minimum:
the Owner, the Architect, the Civil Engineer, the
MEP Engineers, and may include (if applicable)
the Landscape Architect, the Lighting Designer,
the Interior Designer, the Acoustic Engineer and
the Structural Engineer. If available at this point
in the project, the charrette may also include
the Building Engineer, a cost consultant, and the
Commissioning Agent.
It is a good idea to come to the sustainable design
charrette prepared with site plans, information
about the program and project design
requirements, any preliminary design documents,
and information about site conditions, local
zoning ordinances, building codes, stormwater
treatment requirements, open space requirements
and parking requirements, etc.
At the charrette, the entire project team should
review the project in the context of LEED

requirements and discuss strategies that make
sense for the program, budget and schedule.
These strategies should be recorded on a LEED
Scorecard or worksheet, along with designated
responsibilities for further design investigation
and due dates for reporting back to the team. A
LEED Scorecard is a summary of Credits marked
as ‘yes,’ ‘maybe,’ or ‘no’. The scorecard is used to
help teams organize, review, and target Credits
applicable to the project. It can be continually
updated in order to evaluate each Credit’s status.
Investigation may include cost research as well
as trial calculations to benchmark what is readily
achievable by the project. Detailed information
about specific strategies for LEED Credits and
Prerequisites is provided in the supplementary
guidebooks for LEED-NC and LEED-CI. Blank
LEED Scorecards are available free on the
USGBC website (www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.
aspx?CMSPageID=1447).
A representative sample scorecard for DRES
projects is also provided in each LEED section
(i.e. LEED-NC, LEED-CI). Although the sample
scorecard indicates specific strategies and Credits
recommended by DRES, project teams should
customize their approach as no two projects
are equal and LEED is most effective when it is
tailored to a project’s individual needs. Project
teams are also encouraged to exceed the
minimum requirements for LEED Certification at
the Silver level. This is consistent with the District’s
Green Agenda. Additionally, it builds in a buffer in
case all attempted Credits are not achieved, and
helps ensure projects meet at least the required
LEED Silver standard.
B. Update LEED Scorecard
Following the charrette, the LEED Coordinator
should update the scorecard to reflect the
current LEED goals and strategy, indicating
responsibilities and due dates. The scorecard
should be immediately reissued to the project
team and should be maintained as a living
document throughout the progress of the
project. It is important that at a minimum the
LEED Coordinator keeps track of this historical
information as the LEED Rating System changes
constantly through the Credit Interpretation
Request process, and a Credit that may have
seemed unachievable in the first review may
become more easily achievable at a later date
through a new, accepted alternative compliance
path.

LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

22

C. Set Project Up in LEED Online
After the sustainable design charrette, it is
important to set up the project on LEED Online.
All projects seeking LEED Certification must
submit documentation on LEED Online. LEED
Online is the venue where the USGBC reviews
documentation and provides feedback to the
project team. Setting up the project on LEED
Online usually takes around 30-45 minutes and
is done by the Project Administrator (this is
the LEED Online title for the person who has
registered the project). If someone other than the
LEED Coordinator has registered the project, then
the Project Administrator can assign the LEED
Coordinator to the Project Team Manager role
(which has the same capabilities as the Project
Administrator) or contact the USGBC to have the
Project Administrator role switched to the LEED
Coordinator.
The Project Administrator (or Project Team
Manager) is able to invite project team members
to join the project site on LEED Online and to
assign team members, Credits and Prerequisites
to various team roles. For example, a member
of the design team may be assigned to the
role ‘Architect’. All of the Credits that must be
completed by the Architect will be designated
as such by the Project Administrator. Although
all team members can view all of the posted
documentation online, only the party assigned
to the same role as a particular Credit can alter,
upload or delete documentation for that Credit.

For example, only the team member assigned to
the role ‘Civil Engineer’ may post documentation
under a Credit assigned to the Civil Engineer. At
the time of publication of this Guidebook, there
are at least two LEED Online tutorials available for
free online. Please see the Resources chapter of
this guidebook for further information on LEED
tutorials.
D. Project Team Members Access LEED Online
and Review Letter Templates
It is important to provide access to LEED Online
to all team members once they are invited to
join the project site. LEED Online offers a wealth
of tools, including Letter Templates, Credit
calculators, Credit Interpretation Requests and
Rulings, and an electronic LEED Scorecard. All
team members should visit the project site on
LEED Online once the project is registered so that
they can review the Letter Templates for Credits
to which they are assigned. Letter Templates
outline and clarify Credit requirements. If team
members are aware of the Credit requirements as
they design, and can verify that the design meets
those requirements as they design, then the team
will not have to go back and re-design or add in
elements later to demonstrate LEED compliance.
E. Review Documentation Requirements
All team members responsible for LEED design
integration and documentation should sign on
to the project site on LEED Online and make

Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DCRA in this phase; all phases must be completed
before a permit will be issued. DRES project teams must submit duplicate copies of all documents to DRES.

Non-Residential, Publicly Owned, Financed or
Funded Projects/Privately Funded Projects
(Expedited)

Reside

Subje

Subject to LEED Certiﬁcation Requirements
DCRA Requirements

Documents to be submitted to DCRA

4. Public Agency Engagement

35%

5. Design Investigation and Strategy
Development

D

4. Meeting schedule and participant list for regular meetings
with relevant agency(ies).
(e.g. OPM, OPEFM, DCPR, etc.)
5a. Updated LEED Scorecard

4. Meeting sc
with relevant
(e.g. DCHA, D
5a. Updated G

5b. Preliminary Sustainable Approach Narrative (1-3 pages)

5b. Preliminar

5c. Schematic drawings (site plan, plan, sections, elevations)
indicating integration of LEED-compliant strategies

5c. Schematic
indicating inte
strategies

Pre-Development Review Meeting with DCRA
LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

23

themselves aware of their documentation
responsibilities. If team members are aware of
LEED documentation requirements early on,
then they can integrate these requirements into
design documents, precluding the necessity for
altering documents or changing the design at a
later date. Making changes to the design or to
construction documents in order to accommodate
LEED requirements late in the process only makes
LEED less effective and less efficient. It is also time
consuming and therefore not a very economical
strategy either.
4. Design Development
This phase is really crucial in designing a highperformance, sustainable building. Many decisions
about strategy are made in this phase as a result
of design investigation and cost estimation. It is
important when researching costs and benefits of
specific green building measures that the design
team thinks holistically. For instance, a vegetated roof
system may add a $10/sf cost premium to a project
however it may preclude the need for structural
storm water management, so the project saves the
cost of a cistern or sand filter. When undertaking
the value engineering process, it is important to
remember that many sustainable design elements
aren’t just line items and striking something from the
design may cause an increase in costs elsewhere.
The Project Administrator or Project Team Manager
should ensure that the entire design team has
access to the tools on LEED Online in this phase. All
participants should be using the calculators (typically
inherent in the LEED Letter Templates) to verify that
the design will meet LEED requirements. Design team
members should also familiarize themselves with the
Letter Templates and make note of the documentation
requirements to ensure that drawings contain the
necessary information to show compliance.
By the end of the DD phase, the project team should
have a confirmed LEED Scorecard as well as a clear
strategy for achieving each Prerequisite and Credit.
Some minor changes to the LEED strategy may be
made in the ensuing project phases, but the bulk of
the planning, research and integration of LEED should
be complete before the Construction Documents phase.

A. Enhanced Commissioning (optional, all projects)
Fundamental commissioning of the building
is a required Prerequisite that is part of the
Construction Submittal, but if the project
team intends to pursue EA Credit 3: Enhanced
Commissioning, the DD phase is also the key
timeframe for the Enhanced Commissioning
process to begin. The Commissioning Authority
will review the MEP design documents, the
Owner’s Project Requirements and the Basis of
Design. The MEP team will need to document
their response to the Commissioning Authority’s
comments in order to obtain this Credit. This
process can help assure that the appropriate
systems and appropriate sizing of those systems
are used in the building. This is important because
optimizing mechanical, electrical and plumbing
design are critical to building performance over its
lifespan.
B. Precertification
(optional, LEED for Core & Shell only)
If a project is pursuing Certification under the
LEED-CS rating system, the end of DD is an ideal
time to seek Precertification from the USGBC. This
service is provided to help project Owners market
to prospective tenants, and may assist teams
pursuing Expedited Permitting from the District
to demonstrate a commitment to a specific level
of LEED Certification. Precertification is available
for a flat rate of $2500 (USGBC members)/$3500
(non-members) per project and an overview
of the Precertification process is posted on
the LEED website: www.usgbc.org/ShowFile.
aspx?DocumentID=2257.
Precertification does not guarantee the level of
eventual certification, nor does it require the
project team to a certain level of certification,
however it is important that the level of
Precertification sought is in line with the eventual
project certification goals. In other words, don’t
promise a LEED Platinum project if you can only
deliver Gold and so on. It is better to pre-certify
at a lower level that the project may eventually
exceed than to over-promise.

LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

24

C. Design Phase Review
(all projects, all rating systems)
In order to best manage the LEED certification
process, it is recommended that the project team
undergo the Design Phase Review in the CDs
phase. Feedback from the USGBC can inform early
Value Engineering decisions, helping the project
team identify the most cost effective and successful
LEED strategies to achieve the desired level of
certification. The design team will be able to use
this information to make decisions about what to
include in final sets of Construction Documents.
All LEED project documentation must be

submitted on LEED Online. Upon registration
and payment, each project is given its own LEED
project website for storing team documentation
and managing the submittal and feedback
process. It is important to note that the USGBC
will not review any documentation or LEED Letter
Templates until the whole phase is completed
and submitted and payment is rendered. Team
members may continue to modify their Letter
Templates and upload, delete, modify and reupload documents as often as they wish before
the submittal date.
See the Steps to LEED Certification Chapter for detailed
instructions on Precertification and Design Phase
Review.

Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DCRA in this phase; all phases must be completed
before a permit will be issued. DRES project teams must submit duplicate copies of all documents to DRES.

Non-Residential, Publicly Owned, Financed or
Funded Projects/Privately Funded Projects
(Expedited)

Reside

Subj

Subject to LEED Certiﬁcation Requirements
DCRA Requirements

Documents to be submitted to DCRA

6. Conﬁrmed Sustainable Design
Strategy

65%

7. Successful Sustainable Design
Integration

8. Sustainable Design Veriﬁcation

D

6a. Final LEED Scorecard

6a. Final Gree

6b. Final Sustainable Approach Narrative (1-3 pages)

6b. Updated

7a. Revised project drawings demonstrating LEED
requirements are integrated into project design

7a. Revised p
Communities

7b. Completed LEED Letter Templates for every Prerequisite
and Credit that will be attempted (and are listed on the
scorecard)
8. Receipt for submittal of Design Phase Review Documents to
the USGBC

Pre-Development Review Meeting with DCRA

LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

25

5. Construction Documents
It is critical that all LEED requirements show up in
both construction drawings and specifications. For
example, projects pursuing EQ Credit 1 for Outdoor
Air Delivery Monitoring must show the location and
number of carbon dioxide monitors on the plans.
Projects pursuing EQ Credits 4.1-4.4 for LowEmitting Materials must include both performance
criteria (restricting chemical content and harmful
emissions) and documentation requirements in
the specifications. Projects pursing EQ Credit 5
must show deck-to-deck partitions and separate
exhaust for high volume copy rooms and janitor’s
closets, in addition to showing walk-off mats at
all major building entry points at least 6’ in the
direction of travel. These are three examples of
the level of detail that should be reflected in the
construction documents to help to project meet LEED
requirements and to demonstrate compliance to the
USGBC. Other Credits will have other implications
and documentation requirements.
Specifications are a critical component to successfully
implementing LEED requirements on the job
site. In addition to providing guidance regarding
performance criteria for building products and
materials, the specifications should clearly indicate
what documentation submittals look like and
which LEED Credits should be documented in each
spec section. The more detailed the specifications
are about LEED requirements and documentation
expectations, the easier it will be for the General
Contractor to manage the process on the job site.

See the Specifications Guidance chapter for details.
Project Owners may wish to require an early
submittal of Construction Waste Management
and Indoor Air Quality Management Plans by
the contractor to ensure these requirements are
understood and implemented from ground-breaking
onward.
Project Owners may also wish to require LEED
progress reports in addition to normal project
progress reports. Contract documents can require
that Construction Waste Management, Recycled
Content, Regional Materials and other materials
Credits be tracked consistently and updated reports
provided at regular intervals.
Some project Owners even tie these progress
reports to payments to ensure that the proper
documentation is collected in a timely manner. It is
extremely difficult to obtain materials documentation
once sub-contractors have been compensated and
their contracts closed out.
The LEED Coordinator should review the project
specifications to ensure that they reflect all LEED
requirements associated with the targeted strategy.
Having detailed and thorough documents will
assist General Contractors and Sub-contractors
estimate project costs and bid on the project
accurately, keeping project costs in line without
having to sacrifice sustainability later in the Value
Engineering process.
The LEED Coordinator should also participate in any
pre-bid conferences to assist in clarifying the project’s
LEED strategy and sustainability goals.

Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DCRA in this phase; all phases must be completed
before a permit will be issued. DRES project teams must submit duplicate copies of all documents to DRES.
OPM Requirements

Within 60 days
11. Construction Phase
of Contract
Compliance Verification
Award

Monthly

12. Construction Phase
Compliance Verification

Documents to be submitted to OPM and the Architect's
LEED coordinator by the General Contractor
11a. Copy of LEED‐AP Certificate for General Contractor's
on‐site LEED documentation coordinator
11b. LEED Kick‐off meeting (agenda, sign‐in sheet)
11c. Construction Waste Management Plan
11d. Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
12. General Contractor's LEED documentation with
signed, completed cover sheet

Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is Issued
OPM/DCRA/DDOE
Requirements

Completion

13. Sustainable Construction
Verification

Documents to be submitted to OPM, DCRA & DDOE
13a. Construction Phase Review, issued by USGBC
13b. Final LEED Certification Award, issued by USGBC

Documents to be submitted

13. Final, approved Green Commu
workbook (all disciplines).

Final Certificate of Occupancy is Issued; Bond is Returned (for Expedited
Projects)
LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

26

6. Construction Administration
The best strategy to ensure successful
implementation of LEED requirements on the job
site is to hold a sustainable design kick-off meeting
with the General Contractor and sub-contractors
for major trades and disciplines (e.g. mechanical,
plumbing, electric, concrete or steel). At this kickoff meeting, the Architect’s LEED Coordinator
should review the LEED Scorecard with the General
Contractor and major sub-contractors, paying
particular attention to all Construction Phase LEED
Prerequisites and Credits. At the meeting, the
LEED performance criteria and documentation
requirements should be reviewed. Just because it is
in the specifications, does not mean that it has been
read or understood!
The General Contractor should appoint its own
internal LEED Coordinator or consultant to manage
the documentation process and to coordinate with
the subcontractors to collect all of the information
required to demonstrate LEED compliance. DRES
requires that the General Contractor appoint a
LEED-AP to manage LEED documentation and
implementation on site.
Responsibilities for the Contractor’s LEED Coordinator
include compiling all LEED construction phase
documentation and providing progress reports to
the Architect’s LEED Coordinator as well as to DRES.
The Contractor’s LEED Coordinator must complete
and sign the cover sheet included in the Specification
Guidance chapter of this Guidebook.
The Architect is responsible for customizing the
LEED Progress Report Cover Sheet document as well
as LEED Documentation Submittal Requirements
throughout the specifications so that contract
documents and progress reporting tool are applicable
only to the Credits and Prerequisites included in the

specific project’s unique LEED strategy.
The Architect’s LEED Coordinator should review
the General Contractor’s Construction Waste
Management Plan and Indoor Air Quality
Management Plan and make recommendations to
assure compliance with LEED requirements.
The Architect’s LEED Coordinator should also assist
the Architect by reviewing submittals, advising
on LEED compliance and assisting the General
Contractor in locating suitable product and material
substitutions when necessary. The Architect’s LEED
Coordinator should assist the General Contractor
in evaluating the merits of materials and products
relevant to LEED requirements and by reviewing
ongoing calculations and documentation to
benchmark against LEED Credit thresholds.
The Architect’s LEED Coordinator should make
periodic visits to the job site to verify that the
Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan is being
followed (it is a Prerequisite!), the Construction
Indoor Air Quality Management Plan is being
followed, and that documentation is being collected
consistently and appears complete and accurate to
date.
As individual Materials & Resources Credits are
completed, the Architect’s LEED Coordinator may
review these and close them out. A well-run LEED
project should have only Commissioning and
Construction Waste Management documentation to
complete at project completion.
Although the USGBC will probably never visit your
job site, remember that projects located in the
District are highly visible to the USGBC staff (the
main office is located in Washington, DC) and that
LEED projects should be on their best behavior.

LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

27

A. Construction Phase Review
At the project’s completion, the Architect’s LEED
Coordinator should coordinate with the General
Contractor and the project team the submittal
of all construction related documentation to the
USGBC for Construction Phase Review. When
the USGBC feedback is received with requests
for Clarification, the Architect’s LEED Coordinator
should work with the General Contractor’s LEED
Coordinator and project design team to amend or
reinforce construction documentation as needed
and re-submit to the USGBC.
Should any Credit appeals be needed (for Credits
not granted in the two rounds of Construction
phase documentation review), the Contractor’s
LEED Coordinator should manage the process of
revising the documentation and appealing the
Credit.

See the Steps to LEED Certification Chapter for
detailed instructions on Construction Phase
Review.
B. Certification
Once both rounds of the Construction Phase
Review are complete, the USGBC will offer the
project a final certification award. The project
team can choose not to accept the award, if there
are any Credits that need to be appealed. If the
project team and project Owner are happy with
the level of certification offered, they may accept
the award and a LEED Plaque with mounting
hardware will be sent. Projects teams that would
like to integrate the plaque into the building
architecture (e.g. have the emblem etched into
glass or stone walls, floors, etc.) may obtain
specifications from the USGBC to do so.

It is important to note that if the project does
not meet the LEED criteria, a Credit appeal may
involve making changes to the building, which
will require change orders, revised drawings,
etc. These will be the responsibility of the design
team. Both LEED Coordinators should remain in
contact with the USGBC throughout the project
and assist the Owner (DRES) and the project team
until Certification is awarded.
Compliance verification documents to be submitted to DRES, DCRA and DDOE in construction and upon
completion before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued.

Documents to be submitted to OPM and the Architect's
LEED coordinator by the General Contractor
11a. Copy of LEED‐AP Certificate for General Contractor's
on‐site LEED documentation coordinator
11b. LEED Kick‐off meeting (agenda, sign‐in sheet)
11c. Construction Waste Management Plan
11d. Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
12. General Contractor's LEED documentation with
signed, completed cover sheet

OPM Requirements

Within 60 days
11. Construction Phase
of Contract
Compliance Verification
Award

Monthly

12. Construction Phase
Compliance Verification

Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is Issued
OPM/DCRA/DDOE
Requirements

Completion

Documents to be submitted to OPM, DCRA & DDOE

13. Sustainable Construction
Verification

13a. Construction Phase Review, issued by USGBC
13b. Final LEED Certification Award, issued by USGBC

Docum

13. Final, ap
workbook (a

Final Certificate of Occupancy is Issued; Bond is Returned (for Expedited
Projects)
LEED Certification | Managing LEED Certification by Project Phase

28

LEED Certification | LEED Project Management Matrix

29

Project Team*

OPM

LEED Coordinator

w/ USGBC

Submittals

Attend interim LEED
check-in meetings
Pay USGBC for Credit
Interpretation
Requests, if needed
Participate in interim
LEED check-in meetings
Pay USGBC for Design
Phase Review

Design investigation;
submit CIRs as needed

Participate in whole team
integrated sustainable
design charrette; establish
LEED goals
Issue RFP for Commissioning services & pay Project
Registration Fee

Review with design team:
a) LEED Requirements
b) Documentation roles &
responsibilities
c) LEED scorecard

Integrate
sustainable
design req’ts:
a) RFP
b) Interview
c) Selection
Process
Award project

Assist with
preliminary
sustainable
design strategy,
integrate with
proposal

Submit LEED core &
shell projects for
Pre-certiﬁcation

35%

65%

Coordinate & submit
Credit Interpretation
Requests

Submit CIRs as needed

a) Submittals
b) Construction
documentation
c) Calculations
d) Site visits

Review for LEED
compliance:

LEED kick-oﬀ meeting at
job site; review LEED
with Construction team

Tie payments to monthly
LEED progress reports.

Assist construction
team and CxA with
construction phase
documentation
Submit Construction
Phase Review package
to USGBC
Assist with clariﬁcation
requests and appeals
as needed
Accept Certiﬁcation
award or appeal
credits

Accept Certiﬁcationaward or appeal
credits

Pay Construction
Phase Review fee to
USGBC

Assist in Construction
Phase clariﬁcations

Complete construction
phase documentation
(General Contractor,
Sub-Contractors, CxA)

Contractor & subcontractor LEED orientation
Design team reviews
LEED submittals for
compliance

Completion

Construction Administration

95% | 100%

Design Phase Review:
documentation,
submittal, clariﬁcations

Monthly

Construction Phase
Review: documentation,
submittal, clariﬁcations

At Completion

Requests for
clariﬁcation issued
Final certiﬁcation
award oﬀered

Keep construction team on track to meet desired LEED/
Sustainable goals & requirements.

Submit Design Phase
Review package to
USGBC
Provide additional
documentation &
clariﬁcation as needed
Coordinate credits &
prereq. appeals as
needed

Review plans,
speciﬁcations,
documentation for
LEED compliance

Clarify LEED requirements at pre-bid mtgs
Include LEED
performance &
documentation req’ts
in contract documents

“Green” plans/drawings,
speciﬁcation, documents,
as needed

Construction
Documents/Pre-bid

*Project Team includes: Architect, Civil Engineer, Mechanical Engineer, Electrical Engineer, Plumbing Engineer, Interior Designer, Landscape Architect, Lighting Designer,
Acoustic Consultant, Speciﬁcations Writer, Commissioning Authority/ Agent, General Contractor, Sub-Contractors, Building Engineer
** For OPM projects only

DDOE

DCRA

OPM**

0%

Register project for LEED
& purchase Reference
Guide for team, if needed

Keep design team on track to meet desired LEED/Sustainable goals & requirements.

Facilitate sustainable
design charrette
Register Project
Set up project & team on
LEED Online
Research Credit Interpretation Rulings (CIRs)
Submit CIRs as needed
Assist with RFP for
commisioning services

Research:
a) CIRs
b) Sustainable
materials & technologies for design team,
as needed
Assist with launch of
commisioning services

Integrate LEED req’ts
with design, develop
alternative compliance
paths or innovative
design strategies

Participate in whole team
integrated sustainable
design charrette

A/E team
establishes
preliminary
sustainable
design strategy

Establish LEED goals

Design Development

Schematic Design

Pre-Design

LEED Certiﬁcation

Provide proof of LEED
Certiﬁcation to DDOE
& DCRA for ﬁnal
Certiﬁcate of
Occupancy

LEED Certiﬁcation is
awarded

Assist in development of case study
for Education &
Outreach credit
Assist Owner in
registering Project
for LEED-EB: O&M

Execute M&V plan
Conduct thermal
comfort survey
Implement
Education &
Outreach program
Register Project For
LEED-EB: O&M

Assist Owner with
thermal comfort
survey

Assist Owner with
M&V plan

Occupancy

Stepsof
Title
toImportant
LEED
Stuff & Things
Certification
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
When and How Do You Interact With the USGBC
and LEED Online?
The steps to project certification are few, but there is a
lot of work behind each step, and as this process spans
the entire design and construction timeline, it requires
attention, consistency and oversight. The steps are
listed in brief below, and are described in more detail in
this chapter. Although you will see in the project roles
and responsibilities matrix that there are recommended
timeframes for completing each of these steps, it is
important to note that every single one of these steps
must be completed to achieve certification. If the
project team starts late, the team must perform more
of the steps in less time.

PROJECT CERTIFICATION STEPS

Terms in BOLD will be defined in context below as well
as in the Glossary. LEED Online tutorials are shown in
the Resources chapter of this Guidebook, and provide
a visual demonstration of the steps described in this
Guidebook. It is highly recommended that the Project
Administrator or Project Team Manager for LEED Online
become familiar with the LEED Online website and its
features.
LEED Online can function slowly at times, depending
on the level of traffic the site is experiencing at any
given time. Please exercise patience! If you are having
technical problems with the website, you should
contact the USGBC.

WHEN

1 Project Registration*

Pre-Design or SD

2 Team Administration

Pre-Design or SD

3 Scorecard Administration

SD

4 CIR (Credit Interpretation Request)*

at any time needed

5 Prerequisite and Credit Documentation

DD and CA

6 Project Narrative

DD

7 Project Summary

DD

8 General Documents

DD

9 Precertification (optional, for LEED-CS projects only)*

DD

10 Design Phase Review*

DD or CDs

11 Construction Phase Review*

CA/Completion

*Requires payment of fee to USGBC

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

30

1. Project Registration
A. When should I Register a Project?
Register your project as soon as it is awarded or
as soon as possible thereafter.
B. Why is Registering early so important?
Registering the project provides the team access
to the tools needed to measure and verify that
the design will meet LEED requirements. It is
important that team members are able to do this
as they go, rather than waiting until the design
is complete, necessitating changes to the design
to meet LEED requirements. Tools include: an
electronic LEED Scorecard; a common website for
the team to post draft documentation for internal
review; LEED Letter Templates, with embedded
calculators to assist in design verification; access
to posted Credit Interpretation Requests and
official Credit Interpretation Rulings, which
clarify the USGBC’s expectations and expand the
sustainable design strategies and approaches
permissible under the LEED rating system.
Registering the project also preserves the project’s
eligibility under the current rating system
at the time of registration. The LEED rating
systems are on track to be updated annually,
becoming more stringent every year. If the team
is designing under a particular rating system,
that is the rating system that should be used to
evaluate the project. Project teams who delay
registration jeopardize the project’s eligibility
for LEED Certification at all, and they inhibit the
team’s ability to design in accordance with LEED
requirements effectively.
LEED is not an additive system whereby a team
can simply add LEED elements to a project at the
last minute and expect to achieve Certification.
Sustainable design and LEED criteria must be
integrated into the design to be effective,
economical and to achieve Certification.
C. Who Registers the Project?
Anyone on the team can register the project,
whether it is the Owner, the Project Manager, the
Sustainability Coordinator, the LEED Consultant,
etc. The person who registers the project will
be, by default, the Project Administrator
who manages the project on LEED Online. If
this person does not wish to be the Project
Administrator, the role can be switched to

another team member at any time by contacting
the LEED support staff at the USGBC via email,
or by assigning another team member to the
Project Team Manager role on LEED Online. This
role has the same authority and capabilities as
the Project Administrator. If more than one team
member wishes to share the responsibilities for
managing the Certification process, the Project
Administrator can assign more than one Project
Team Manager, all of whom will have the same
level of access to manage the project on LEED
Online. Ideally, each team should identify one
Project Administrator or Project Team Manager to
coordinate and oversee all LEED Online activities.
You will need a USGBC Site User Account to
register a project. If you do not already have one,
it is easy to sign up and it is free. You do not
need to be a USGBC member to have an account,
however, if your company or organization is a
member, you will want to have the company ID
handy to add to your account so that you can
receive the member discount when registering the
project.
D. How do I Register a Project?
Registering a LEED project takes five minutes and
is only $450 for USGBC member organizations/
companies and $600 for non-member companies.
You can register a project here: www.usgbc.org/
DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=65.
You will need the following information to
register a project. This information can be
modified later, so do not hesitate to register the
project with whatever information you have
available as soon as possible. You do not need to
declare the level of LEED Certification pursued at
this time or any time during the process. Have this
information when you register:
a. LEED Rating System that you are registering
under (e.g. LEED-NC, LEED-CI, LEED-CS)
b. Project Name
c. Is the project confidential? (it will not show
up on the public USGBC website if you indicate
that it is confidential)
d. Project Address (an intersection is fine if you do
not have an address yet)

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

31

e. Project Administrator Contact Information
(this is, by default, already filled in with the
profile information of the person registering
it, but it can be filled in with another
team member’s information if the Project
Administrator is known at the time of
registration and it is not the person registering
the project)
f. Project Owner’s Name, Organization and Email
address
g. Project Details:
i. Owner Type (i.e. private, non-profit,
government, etc.)
ii. Project Scope (i.e. interior, core & shell,
single building, multiple buildings)
iii. Site Condition (i.e. brownfield, greenfield,
previously developed, previously
undeveloped)
iv. Occupant Type (i.e. government, mixed, for
profit, non-profit)
v. Owner Occupied? (yes or no)
vi. Gross Square Footage (estimated)
vii. Project Budget (estimated)
viii. Current Project Phase (e.g. planning, SD,
DD, CDs, CA, occupied, etc.)
h. Project Type (many options, check off
as many as apply)
After completing this simple registration form, click
on the ‘Proceed to Payment’ button on the bottom
of the screen.
You may elect to pay immediately by Credit card, or
to pay by check. If you pay by Credit card, a receipt
will typically be emailed to you within a few minutes.
If you elect to pay by check, you will receive an
invoice and payment instructions by email as well.
Remember! The project is not officially registered
until payment is received by the USGBC and
processed. If you are registering a project before a
rating system change, you want to either pay by
Credit card or give yourself plenty of time for a check
transaction.

2. Team Administration
A. When should I set up the Project Team
on LEED Online?
All projects seeking LEED Certification must
submit documentation on LEED Online. This
is the only venue where the USGBC reviews
documentation and provides feedback to the
project team. In order to provide the team
with early access to tools, Letter Templates
and information about Credit documentation
requirements, as well as a place to post
documentation as it is completed, it is important
to set up the project team and the scorecard
on LEED Online either before the Sustainable
Design Charrette, or immediately afterwards,
once roles and responsibilities have been
discussed in relation to the LEED strategy. If not
all team members are engaged yet (e.g. General
Contractor), their roles may be assigned at a later
date. Credits can be assigned to roles at any time.
B. Who sets up the Project Team on LEED
Online?
Setting up the project team on LEED Online
usually takes only a few minutes and is done
by the Project Administrator. If the Project
Administrator wishes to reassign the role, they
may either ask the USGBC to assign the role to
someone else (contact leedinfo@usgbc.org). They
may invite the sustainable design coordinator/
LEED consultant to join the team (described
below), invite them to join the project on LEED
Online, and assign them to the Project Team
Manager role so they may take over the Project
Administrator responsibilities.
C. How is the Project site on LEED Online
accessed?
The Project Administrator should log into the
LEED Online website (www.leedonline.usgbc.org).  
You will first arrive at the Project Selector Page.
If you are only involved in one LEED project, you
will see its name and should click on the ‘Enter’
button to the right of the project name. If you
are on multiple LEED Project teams, you will need
to select the appropriate project and click on the
‘Enter’ button to the right of its name. If you
are adding a new project and have the Project
Access Code, you may enter it at the bottom of
the page. You will repeat these steps each time
you log into LEED Online to access any particular
project.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

32

Step One: Log into LEED Online.

Step Two: ‘Enter’ your project from the project selector page.

Step Three: Once you have entered the project’s LEED Online site, you must
click on the button ‘Begin LEED Certification Process‘.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

33

D. How is the Project Team created and
managed on LEED Online?
After logging into the project on LEED Online
and initiating the LEED Certification Process,
you should be on the Credit Scorecard and
Status page. From here you can click on the
‘Team Admin’ tab at the top of the page and
you will be directed to the page for project team
management.
Under the ‘Project Team’ heading, you will see
‘Invite Someone to Join this Project’ and a space
to input an email address. You should add team
email addresses, one at a time, and click the ‘Send
Invitation’ button after each. Team members will
receive an email with instructions for logging
on to LEED Online, registering a new Site User
Account if necessary, and for adding the Project
Access Code.
Once team members have accepted the invitation
and added the Project Access Code to their Site
User Account, their names and affiliation will
show up under the ‘Project Team’ heading on the
‘Team Admin’ tab.

Each team member has two buttons to the right
of their name: ‘Manage Roles’ and ‘Remove User’.
When a team member has joined the project on
LEED Online, the Project Administrator or Project
Team Manager must click on the ‘Manage Roles’
button and assign a role to that team member to
give them access to upload documentation and
complete LEED letter templates. For example, a
member of the design team may be assigned to
the role ‘Architect’. All of the Credits that must be
completed by the Architect will be designated as
such by the Project Administrator.
Although all team members can view all of the
posted documentation online, only the party
assigned to the same role as a particular Credit
can alter, upload or delete documentation for
that Credit. For example, only the team member
assigned to the role ‘Civil Engineer’ may post
documentation under Credit assigned to the Civil
Engineer.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

34

All team members will be able to view all Credit
documentation on the LEED Online Project
Site, but will only be able to add, delete or alter
the documentation for roles they are officially
assigned to by the Project Administrator or
Project Team Manager(s). Also, the Project
Administrator or Project Team Manager(s) may at
any time create and assign new roles within the
project.
Project team members may be assigned to more
than one role. For instance, a team member may
be both Project Team Manager and Architect.
Simply check off as many roles as you wish to
assign to that team member and then click on
the ‘Update’ button at the bottom of the page.
Roles can also be assigned to more than one team

member. You may have several team members
assigned to the ‘HVAC Engineer’ or ‘Owner’ role,
for example. Anyone assigned to a role can add,
alter or delete Credit documentation for any
Prerequisite or Credit also assigned to that role.
They may also fill out, make changes to and save
the LEED Letter Templates for any Prerequisite
or Credit also assigned to that role.
Changes to the Project Team can be made at
any time, and new team members can be added
whenever they are needed, simply by following
the same instructions above. Team members can
also be removed by clicking on the ‘Remove User’
button to the right of their name if they are no
longer part of the team.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

35

3. Scorecard Administration
A. When should the LEED Scorecard be set up
on LEED Online?
All projects seeking LEED Certification must
submit documentation on LEED Online. This
is the only venue where the USGBC reviews
documentation and provides feedback to the
project team. In order to provide the team
with early access to tools, letter templates
and information about Credit documentation
requirements, as well as a place to post
documentation as it is completed, it is important
to set up the project team and the scorecard
on LEED Online either before the Sustainable
Design Charrette, or immediately after team
member roles and responsibilities have been
discussed in relation to the LEED strategy.

B. Who sets up the LEED Scorecard?
Setting up the LEED Scorecard is typically done
by the Project Administrator. If the Project
Administrator wishes to reassign the role, they
may either ask the USGBC to assign the Project
Administrator role to someone else (contact
leedinfo@usgbc.org), or they may invite the
Sustainable Design Coordinator/LEED Consultant
to join the team, invite them to join the project
on LEED Online, and assign them to the Project
Team Manager role so they may take over the
Project Administrator responsibilities.

Click on the ‘Expand All Credit Categories’ button in the middle of this page to see your project’s
electronic scorecard.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

36

C. How is the LEED Scorecard set up and
managed on LEED Online?
Every time you log onto LEED Online and select
your project from the Project Selector page, it
will automatically open onto the project’s ‘Credit
Scorecard & Status’ page. If you are on another
task and wish to navigate back to this age, simply
click on the ‘Credit Scorecard & Status’ tab at the
top of your screen and you will be brought back
to this page.
Every Prerequisite and Credit will be marked
‘Credit Not Attempted’ to the right, until you
select a role from the drop down menu. For
example, for SSpr1 Construction Activity Pollution
Prevention, you may want to scroll through
the drop down menu until you find the ‘Civil
Engineer’ and select that role to be responsible
for documenting this Prerequisite.
All Prerequisites must be assigned to a role since
they must all be completed. Any Credits you
choose to pursue should also be assigned to a
role. If you are not sure if the team will pursue
a certain Credit, you should assign it initially, so
that the team member responsible for analyzing
the feasibility of this Credit will have access to the
LEED Letter Template and any tools, calculators,
etc. to verify whether the design can meet the
LEED criteria or not. You can always opt to
discontinue pursuit of any given Credit at a later
date, so do not hesitate to assign any and all
Credits you are considering for your project.
You will notice that once a Prerequisite or
Credit has been assigned to a team member (or
team role), that the name of the Credit becomes
a hyperlink, able to direct you to that Prerequisite
or Credit’s own individual page where the LEED
Letter Template is accessed and documentation
will be uploaded.
There is a handy symbol key at the top of your
scorecard to explain all of the various symbols
that you will see on your scorecard throughout
the process. In addition, at the time of publication
of this Guidebook, there are at least two LEED
Online tutorials available for free online. Please
see the LEED General Resources chapter of this
guidebook for further information on LEED
tutorials.

4.Credit Interpretation Request (CIR)
A. When should Credit Interpretation Requests
Be Submitted?
The Credit Interpretation Request (CIR) and ruling
process was established for project applicants
seeking technical and administrative guidance on
how LEED Credits apply to their projects. If there
are any Credits or Prerequisites where you feel
your project meets the intent, but the approach
is not explicitly described in the LEED Reference
Guide, you should submit a Credit Interpretation
Request (CIR). CIRs may be submitted at any time
during the LEED Certification process.
CIRs are collected every other week and passed
to the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) for that
section of the LEED Rating System. For example,
the Sustainable Sites TAG will review any CIRs
for Sustainable Sites Credits. The TAG discusses
the merit of the Credit approach proposed in the
CIR and posts both the request and the ruling on
LEED Online for all project teams to access. The
Credit Interpretation Response will either reject
the proposed approach (usually for insufficient
environmental merit), allow it for the specific
project only, or allow it for the project in question
as well as all future projects with similar design
constraints and sustainable design solutions.
By posting these Credit Interpretation Requests
and Rulings online, the CIR process is transparent
and fair. All project teams are given equal access
to alternative approaches and Credit clarification.
Teams should be aware of the following:
• There are no longer two (2) free CIRs with
every project registration (since team members can
access all existing CIRs via the USGBC website).
• CIRs cost $220 each. A project may submit
an unlimited number of requests. The USGBC
typically takes 2-4 weeks to respond, but this
time frame is not guaranteed.
• CIRs are evaluated by the Technical Advisory
Group that oversees the particular section in
which the Credit or Prerequisite falls.
• Rulings are posted with the requests; the
process is transparent and every project team
has access to this decision making process via
the CIR website.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

37

• Any registered project team member or
USGBC member can research all of the existing
CIRs for free.
• Project team members should always research
existing CIRs when Credits or Prerequisites
present challenges.
• Often teams can borrow an alternative
compliance path that has already been
submitted by another project team and
approved.
• Project teams should submit new CIRs only
when they are unable to find answers within
the existing CIRs and Rulings.
B. Who Submits Credit Interpretation Requests?
Any LEED registered project team member can
submit a new Credit Interpretation Request on
LEED-Online. Only LEED registered project team
members can submit CIRs.
C. How are Credit Interpretation Request
submitted?
The document referenced below advises CIR
customers on how to most effectively use the CIR
process. Note that project teams must adhere
to the CIRs current at the time of registration
in addition to the rulings received for their own
CIRs. For CIR guidance, please refer to: www.
usgbc.org/ShowFile.aspx?DocumentID=1510.
Access to existing Credit Interpretations and
Rulings (CIRs) is available through the Project
Certification portion of the USGBC web site
once you are Signed In. To view existing Credit
Interpretations and Rulings, please refer to: www.
usgbc.org/LEED/Credit/CIRMain.aspx?CMSPageID
=1432&CategoryID=1195&.
Only USGBC members, LEED registered project
team members, and workshop attendees have
access to view CIRs. (Note: workshop attendees
only have access for one year from the date of the
workshop).

5. Prerequisite and Credit Documentation
A. When should team members access
Prerequisites and Credits?
The preliminary LEED strategy should have been
established by the project team at the Sustainable
Design Charrette, which should ideally occur
early in Schematic Design. No matter when the
charrette is held, a whole team meeting to discuss
strategy, roles and responsibilities is the only way
to launch and manage a LEED project successfully.
Immediately following this charrette, all team
members should have been invited to join the
project site on LEED Online and assigned to team
roles. In addition, all Prerequisites and pursued
Credits should have also been assigned to team
roles so that team members may have access
to them. Prerequisites and Credits should be
hyperlinked to their own pages at this point
and access to the LEED Letter Templates and
documentation uploading should be available.
Team members should review their Letter
Templates as soon as possible so that they
are aware of Performance Criteria and
Documentation responsibilities necessary to
demonstrate that the project design meets
LEED requirements. If team members are
knowledgeable about LEED expectations from
the beginning, they can very likely incorporate
the LEED requirements into the project design
and documents and will not need to make
changes later in the process. This assists in
efficient documentation as well as accurate cost
estimation.
It is important to note that you may upload any
amount of documentation at any time. You may
work on your Letter Templates in increments. The
USGBC will not review any documentation until
the entire phase (Design Phase or Construction
Phase) has been completed, the full set of
Prerequisite and Credit documentation (including
the project summary, narrative and general
documents) has been submitted by the Project
Team Administrator, and the USGBC has been
paid to review the documentation.
Team members should feel free to upload partial
documentation and to work on completing their
Letter Templates as they have the information
available. Documentation can be uploaded,
deleted, revised and re-uploaded as often as you
want. The LEED Online project site is a great place
to store it in a secure (only team members have
access) and easily accessible place. Storing even

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

38

incomplete documentation on the project’s LEED
site allows the Project Administrator/Sustainable
Design Coordinator/Green Building Consultant
to review the documentation and offer feedback
(see Notes below, under item C.).
B. Who documents LEED Prerequisites and
Credits?
Every team member that is assigned as the
responsible party for a particular Prerequisite
or Credit will need to complete the LEED Letter
Template and provide documentation. The Project
Administrator or Project Team Manager(s) may
assist in uploading documents or in reviewing the
documentation for completeness and accuracy,
but the Project Administrator should not be
expected to complete documentation for other
disciplines.
C. How do team members access LEED Letter
Templates and upload documentation?
As a team member, log into the LEED Online
website (www.leedonline.usgbc.org). You will first
arrive at the Project Selector Page. If you are only
involved in one LEED project, you will see its name
and should click on the ‘Enter’ button to the
right of the project name. If you are on multiple
LEED Project teams, you will need to select the
appropriate project and click on the ‘Enter’ button
to the right of its name. If you are adding a new
project and have the Project Access Code, you
may enter it at the bottom of the page. You will
repeat these steps each time you log into LEED
Online to access any particular project.
Once you log into LEED Online and select your
project on the Project Selector Page, you should
automatically be taken to the Credit Scorecard
& Status page. You may need to click on the
‘Expand All Credit Categories’ button to see
the entire scorecard and all of your Credits. You
may then navigate to a specific Credit from the
Credit Scorecard & Status page by clicking on the
specific LEED Prerequisite or Credit to which you
are assigned. This opens up the ‘homepage’ for
that Prerequisite or Credit.
Once you have arrived on your Credit’s
‘homepage’, you will see headings for: i)
Claim of Credit Status, ii) Letter Template,
iii) Sample Letter Templates, IV) Review
Comments, and V) Notes:

i.		 Claim of Credit Status - This area provides
an update on your Credit. It is only visible to
the responsible team member, Project Team
Manager and the Project Administrator. If
Clarification has been requested by your
documentation review team, or if the Credit
is ‘Anticipated’ following its review, this status
will show up here in addition to the main
project Credit Scorecard & Status page.
This area also allows you to tweak your Credit
pursuit. In some cases, when a Credit is worth
more than one point (such as WE 3.1-3.2), you
will be able to indicate how many points you
are pursuing. If you are working on a Design
Phase Credit and wish to Defer to Construction
Phase Review, this is also where that option will
appear. If you wish to Unattempt this Credit,
you will be able to click on the ‘Unattempt’
button and do so. The Project Administrator
and the Project Team Manager may also
Unattempt any Credit. This will remove any
and all documentation you have uploaded,
so please be careful to only ‘Unattempt’ a
Credit when you have confirmed that you
absolutely do not wish to pursue it. The Credit
can be reattempted later, but you will need to
redo the Letter Template and re-upload any
documentation.
ii. Letter Template – This is where you
may download your Letter Template. You will
need the Adobe Reader version compatible
with these templates – you may download it
directly from the link on this page. The LEED
Letter Templates will often contain embedded
calculators (when calculations are necessary
to demonstrate Credit compliance) and are
therefore large files. Please be patient when
opening the Letter Templates.
Every Prerequisite and Credit has a LEED
Letter Template that must be completed, no
exceptions. You cannot earn a Prerequisite or
Credit without submitting a template for it.
If you are completing a template normally, you
must complete every box that is bordered in
red, no exceptions. The first items to fill out
are your name and company name, at the top
of the template. Directly below this, if there is
more than one compliance path for achieving
this Credit, you will need to select which
compliance path you are using. Please note
that multiple compliance paths are color-coded
and you will only need to fill out information
in sections bordered in the same color as the
compliance path that you have selected.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

39

There is often a mandatory Credit narrative
(bordered in red) or a sheet description log
that must be provided. Use this space to briefly
describe your Credit approach as well as list
any file names of the documents that you will
be uploading to support that Credit.
You must complete the electronic signature
at the bottom of the page to see your ‘Points
Documented’ at the bottom of your Letter
Template. Your electronic signature includes
your name, the date, user ID (your email
address) and your password. If you have filled
out the template correctly and your project
is earning one or more points, your points
should appear in the bottom, right-hand side
of the template. If your points do not appear,
double check first to make sure all boxes in
red have been filled out, and then check your
calculations to make sure the information
was entered correctly and that the project
calculations show the Credit performance
criteria have been met.
In some circumstances, you may choose
to complete your calculations outside of
the template, for example, in one of the
construction materials Letter Templates, if
you have more entries than there are lines
available, or in a low-emitting materials Credit,
if you need to use the VOC budget method to
demonstrate compliance. If you plan to submit
information that is required in the template
in some other form, then you will need to
specify that you are doing so in the template
‘Narrative (optional)’ box, usually on the last
page of the template. You will also need to
mark an ‘x’ in the box to indicate “The project
is seeking point(s) for this Credit using an
alternate compliance approach.” And indicate
how many points you believe the project will
earn using the approach you have described in
the box labeled ‘Alternative Compliance Points
Documented”. You can use the Narrative
(optional) box or upload a separate narrative to
describe your approach in more detail.

When you have filled out as much of your
template as you intend to at any given time,
you will need to ‘sign’ the template with the
date and your password and click on ‘Save
Template to LEED Online’.
Remember, the USGBC will not review this
until the whole documentation package
is completed, submitted and the review is
paid for, so do not worry about working on
this template often and re-saving your work
whenever you have added something.
The embedded calculators in LEED Letter
Templates can serve as valuable tools to verify
that your design will meet LEED criteria. You
should review them early on to understand
what information you will ultimately need to
provide, and you should use the templates as
yard sticks to measure your design in iterations,
as your design evolves.
iii. Sample Letter Templates – If you do not
have a registered project and you wish to view
letter templates, you may do so here: www.
usgbc.org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=1447
IV. Review Comments – Once the project has
been submitted for either the Design Phase
or Construction Phase Review, the reviewers’
comments will be posted here when they
become available. Please see the Design Phase
Review section below for more information.
V. Notes – This is an area where team members
can leave messages for one another regarding
documentation. The notes will not be viewed
by the USGBC; the notes feature exists entirely
to facilitate communication amongst the team.
The project team member responsible for
documenting the Credit can leave questions
for the Project Administrator, for example.
The Project Administrator or Project Team
Manager(s) may leave comments on draft
documentation that has been uploaded. It is
not required to use this feature, but it can be a
helpful tool.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

40

6. Project Narrative
A. When should the Project Narrative be
completed?
The Project Narrative may be completed at any
time, but must be completed before the Design
Phase Review or Precertification, whichever
comes first.
B. Who completes the Project Narrative?
Typically the LEED coordinator or green building
consultant refines the final document, but it may
be based on project descriptions already written
by other project team members. For example, if
the project is a Planned Unit Development, then
there is likely already a general description of
the project that can provide a basis for the LEED
Project Narrative.

7. Project Summary
A. When should the project Summary be
completed?
The Project Summary must be completed before
the Design Phase Review. It can be revised
before the Construction Phase Review if any of
the information changes. The information in the
Project Summary must match the information in
all Prerequisite and Credit documentation or there
will be Requests for Clarification from the LEED
Reviewers.
B. Who completes the Project Summary?
The Project Administrator or Project Team
Manager must complete the Project Summary. No
other team members will have access, however,
other team members may be called upon to
provide the information needed.

C. What is the Project Narrative?
C. What is the Project Summary?
The project narrative is a 1-3 page document that
describes the overall project and highlights up to
three environmental achievements. This document
exists to give reviewers a big-picture perspective
on the project’s sustainable design strategy and
how the building (or multiple buildings) works.
There may be multiple reviewers examining
different components of your project’s LEED
documentation (for example, an MEP engineer
may review MEP Credits, while an Architect may
review architectural Credits). Without a Project
Narrative, the reviewers might have a hard time
grasping the project in its entirety and would not
be able to review the project accurately.
D. How is the Project Narrative submitted?
Under the ‘Documents’ tab on your project site
on LEED Online, the Project Administrator or
Project Team Manager may upload the Project
Narrative. This can only be done by someone with
one of these two roles. For the Design Phase
Review, this must be uploaded on LEED Online.
If you are submitting your project for
Precertification, the Project Narrative can be
included on the CD’s or in the binders with the
rest of the Precertification submittals.

The Project Summary can be found under the
‘Project Summary’ tab at the top of the screen
on the project site on LEED Online. This page
contains several tabs to provide additional
project information. The information entered
at the time of Registration will automatically be
entered in some of the fields. This page provides
an opportunity to modify and expound on that
information as the project is further developed.
This page also provides a data overview of your
project to the LEED Reviewers so that they have a
common reference point.
D. How is the Project Summary submitted to
LEED Online?
Project Administrators or Project Team Managers
can access the Project Summary by clicking on
the ‘Project Summary’ tab. There are several
sub-tabs with different types of information, such
as a description of the project Owner, Manager,
Architect, Address, etc. All fields on all tabs
must be completed before the project can be
submitted for either the Design Phase Review
or Construction Phase Review. Fields can be
modified by clicking on the ‘Edit’ button at the
bottom right-hand side of any of the tabs on
this page. Once fields have been completed or
modified as desired, click on the ‘Update’ button
at bottom, right.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

41

8. General Documents
A. When should General Documents be 		
completed?
The General Documents may be completed at any
time, but must be completed before the Design
Phase Review or Precertification, whichever
comes first. General Documents submitted for
Precertification will probably need to be updated
before a Design Phase Review, depending on
timing of these two activities. Newer documents
may be submitted before the Construction
Phase Review if the design changes. Design
Phase Credits may need to be updated if this is
the case.
B. Who completes the General Documents?
The Project Administrator or Project Team
Manager must upload the General Documents
as no other team members will have access.
However, other team members must provide the
files needed.

D. How are General Documents submitted?
Project Administrators or Project Team Managers
can upload General Documents by clicking on
the ‘Documents’ tab at the top of the screen on
the project site on LEED Online, or by clicking on
the ‘Documents’ sub-tab on the Project Summary
page. All required documents must be completed
before the project can be submitted for either the
Design Phase Review or Construction Phase
Review. Documents can be added or deleted by
clicking on the ‘Edit’ button at the bottom righthand side of any of the tabs on this page. Once
documents have been uploaded, click on the
‘Update’ button at bottom, right.
If you are submitting your project for
Precertification (LEED-CI only), then your
General Documents can be included on your CD’s
or in your binders with your other submittals.

C. What are the General Documents?
General Documents include site plans, floor
plans, elevations, sections, photos, renderings
or computer models that describe the project.
These documents are uploaded in a central
location on the project site on LEED Online to give
reviewers a big-picture perspective on the project.
There may be multiple reviewers examining
different components of your project’s LEED
documentation (for example, an MEP engineer
may review MEP Credits, while an Architect may
review architectural Credits). In addition, some
files may need to be uploaded repeatedly for
several Credits and as an alternative, may be
located in this area and referred to in individual
Credit narratives (as in, ‘See site plan in General
Documents’).

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

42

9. Precertification
(optional, for LEED-CS projects only)
A. When should Precertification be completed?
If you are designing a building under the LEED for
Core and Shell (LEED-CS) Rating System, you can
apply for Precertification as soon as your LEED
Strategy is defined. Typically this is possible as
early as the Design Development phase, however
some project teams may opt to wait until the
Construction Documents phase to submit. If you
are seeking Expedited Permitting from the
DC Department of Consumer and Regulatory
Affairs (DCRA), you may be required to submit
your project for Precertification in the Design
Development phase.
B. Who completes Precertification?
Typically the Sustainable Design Coordinator
or LEED Consultant will prepare submittals for
Precertification. Since this is an optional service
provided by the USGBC and not submitted
on LEED Online, it is up to the project team to
determine who will oversee this effort.
C. What is Precertification?
If a project is pursuing Certification under
the LEED-CS rating system, the end of
Design Development is an ideal time to seek
Precertification from the USGBC. This service
is provided to help project Owners market
to prospective tenants, and may assist teams
pursuing Expedited Permitting from the District
to demonstrate a commitment to a specific level
of LEED Certification. Precertification is available
for a flat rate of $2500 (USGBC members)/$3500
(non-members) per project. Information regarding
this process including timing for the submittal
and review is posted on the LEED website: www.
usgbc.org/ShowFile.aspx?DocumentID=2257.
Precertification does not guarantee the level
of eventual certification, nor does it commit the
project team to a certain level of certification,
however it is important that the level of
Precertification sought is in line with the eventual
project certification goals. In other words, don’t
promise a LEED Platinum project if you can only
deliver Gold and so on. It is better to pre-certify
at a lower level that the project may eventually
exceed than to over-promise.

D. How are Precertification applications
submitted?
In order to attempt Precertification, the project
team will need to assemble a 1-3 page Project
Narrative, highlighting the sustainable approach
and some General Documents such as site plan,
floor plans, sections and elevations or renderings
(as available at this stage). The project team will
also need to create a LEED Scorecard where all
Credits are marked as ‘yes’ or ‘no’. This scorecard
is an intermediate LEED status evaluation and
does not commit the project to any Credits, or
eliminate the possibility of pursuing additional
Credits later. This scorecard provides an
overview of the Credits to be included in the
Precertification application.
In addition to the overview documents described
above, the project team must complete a sample
LEED Letter Template (found here: www.usgbc.
org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=146) for every
Prerequisite and every Credit marked as ‘yes’ on
the LEED Scorecard. The letter templates should
be filled out by the responsible party to the
fullest extent possible at this phase in design and
should include a narrative statement describing
how the team intends to achieve the Credit.
For example, for IEQ Credit 4.1 Low Emitting
Materials: Adhesives & Sealants, the Architect
can describe in a short paragraph that the project
specifications will include requirements that all
adhesives and sealants must meet the criteria in
the South Coast Air Quality Management District
Rule #1168. At the time of Precertification,
no additional documentation is needed, just a
description of the strategy or approach to meet
the requirements of each Prerequisite and Credit.
These letter templates should be filled out and
saved in another location or downloaded from
LEED Online so that they may be included in the
submittal package.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

43

The Precertification package may be submitted
in hardcopy format (two binders) or electronically
(on two CDs). The Precertification package must
include a LEED Scorecard, Project Narrative,
General Documents and LEED Letter
Templates for all Prerequisites and all Credits that
the team has marked as ‘yes’ on the scorecard.
Project teams will receive an initial review from
the USGBC with Requests for Clarification.
Project teams will have 30 days to respond
to these requests and submit revised Letter
Templates or general documents in binders or on
CDs. If the project team needs more time than 30
days, they may request additional time.
After second review, the USGBC will issue a
Precertification award. Again, this is for marketing
value only. Going through the Precertification
process does not guarantee that specific Credits
or that the same level of Certification will be
achieved in the eventual Design Phase Review
and Construction Phase Review.
In order to hasten the review process, teams
are advised to communicate their anticipated
submittal dates to the USGBC so that the USGBC
will have adequate reviewers on hand to review
documentation and submittals.

10. Design Phase Review
A. When should the Design Phase Review be
completed?
As soon as the project team is able to complete
Credit documentation and LEED Letter
Templates for all Design Phase Prerequisites and
Credits, it is a good idea to submit. It may take
4-6 weeks to hear back from the USGBC with
the initial round of Requests for Clarification,
another 30 days to submit additional or clarified
documentation, and another 2-4 weeks for
the final Design Phase Review. Knowing if
the project will achieve certain Design Phase
Credits can inform some early Value Engineering
decisions, so, ideally this Review will take place in
Design Development or Construction Documents,
before the plans go out to bid.
In order to hasten the review process, teams
are advised to communicate their anticipated
submittal dates to the USGBC so that the USGBC
will have adequate reviewers on hand to review
documentation and submittals.
B. Who completes the Design Phase Review
application?
The Project Administrator or Project Team
Manager will submit the project for the Design
Phase review, however all team members
(design disciplines and Owner) are responsible
for completing their LEED Letter Templates,
uploading supporting documentation files and
assisting the Project Administrator in gathering
the information necessary for the Project
Narrative, the Project Summary and the
General Documents. Documentation guidance
for specific Prerequisites and Credits is provided in
the Appendices of this Guidebook.
C. What is the Design Phase Review?
All LEED Prerequisites and Credits are marked
on the LEED Online Credit Scorecard & Status
page with either a yellow letter ‘d’ or an orange
letter ‘c’ next to them. This is to help you
understand which Credits will be reviewed in the
Design Phase Review (marked ‘d’) and in the
Construction Phase Review (marked ‘c’).
Credits marked ‘d’ may be deferred until the
Construction Phase Review if the compliance
strategy is not clear or adequate supporting
documentation is not available yet. For example,
if the project is seeking an Innovation and

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

44

Design (ID) Credit for Green Housekeeping, the
contract for services may not be available until
closer to the project completion date. Or as
another example, if a project is seeking EQc6.1
Controllability of Systems: Lighting, and intends
to make task lighting a component, this may need
to be deferred until task lighting is purchased,
closer to project completion.
D. How is the Design Phase Review submitted?
The project team should be completing
documentation through the design process.
Documentation should consist of drawings,
specification sections, calculations and other
information to demonstrate LEED criteria are met
through design. In addition, team members must
complete their LEED Letter Templates for each
Prerequisite or Credit that they are assigned to.
All Design Phase Prerequisites and Credits must be
marked as complete or deferred until construction
phase review if they are planned to be attempted.
The ‘Submit’ button will not appear on the Credit
Scorecard & Status page until this is done.
Some teams prefer to have individual
members mark their own Prerequisites and
Credits as complete to indicate to the Project
Administrator or Project Team Manager that
they are ready for an internal review. Other
teams prefer to leave the Prerequisites and
Credits marked as incomplete until the Project
Administrator has reviewed them and marked
them as complete to indicate to that team
member that they are done. It is a matter of
personal preference and either way will work.
Discuss the best communication strategy for
your team early in the process, so that all team
members may receive timely and valuable
feedback.

The entire package and process for the Design
Phase Review should look like this:
i.			 Under the Documents tab, Project
			 Administrator or Project Team Manager
uploads Project Narrative and General
Documents, including project plans, sections,
elevations and renderings to provide LEED
reviewers with a comprehensive overview of
the project/building(s).
ii.		 Under the Project Summary tab, Project
Administrator or Project Team Manager
updates project information, building upon
and modifying information entered at time of
project registration.
iii. Under the Credit Scorecard & Status
tab, team members click on each individual
Prerequisite and Credits pursued to access
the LEED Letter Templates and to upload
supporting documentation files specific to
those Prerequisites and Credits.
iv. Under the Credit Scorecard & Status tab, the
Project Administrator or Project Team
Manager clicks on each individual Prerequisite
and Credit pursued to access the completed
LEED Letter Templates and to review
uploaded documentation specific to those
Credits and Prerequisites.
v.		 For each Design Phase Prerequisite and Credit
the Project Administrator or team member
must click on the ‘Mark as Complete’ button
or opt to ‘Defer to Construction Phase
Review’ before submitting project documents
for the Design Phase Review.
vi.		 A green check mark will appear next to each
Prerequisite and Credit marked as Complete
on the Credit Scorecard & Status page.
vii. Once all documentation is complete, the
Project Administrator will submit the package
to the USGBC for a Design Phase Review.
Payment may be rendered immediately by
Credit card, or by check.
viii. Fees for Design Phase and Construction
Phase Reviews may be found here:
www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.
aspx?CMSPageID=65#fees.
ix. Once payment is rendered, received and
processed, the USGBC will commence
reviewing the Design Phase application.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

45

Within 4-6 weeks the team should receive
a preliminary response on design Credit
strategies and documentation from the
USGBC with Requests for Clarification.
x. Requests for Clarification will be sent to
the Project Administrator in a PDF report
document as well as posted individually on
each Prerequisite’s and Credit’s individual
page.
xi.		 Prerequisites and Credits will be marked
‘Anticipated’ or ‘Pending Clarification’
on the LEED Scorecard and Status page.
Team members have 30 days to respond by
clarifying documentation and narratives,
providing additional documentation or by
withdrawing the Credit. Teams may request
more time if needed.
xii. The USGBC will review the updated
Prerequisite and Credit Documentation and
provide a final report within 2-4 weeks.
Design Phase Prerequisites and Credits will
be marked as ‘Anticipated’ or ‘Denied’ at
this time. Denied Credits may be appealed,
if desired. As they are required, denied
Prerequisites must be appealed.
xiii. The Project Administrator must either
click on the ‘Accept Review’ or ‘Appeal
Review’ button to indicate to the USGBC how
the team wishes to proceed.
xiv. Appeals cost $500 per Prerequisite or
Credit. Depending on the complexity of the
appeal, this can add an additional 2-4 weeks
onto the Design Phase Review timeline.
Details about Appeals may be found here:
www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageI
D=1497#certification_award
xv.		 The project has officially moved into the
Construction Phase.

11. Construction Phase Review
A. When should the Construction Phase Review
be completed?
The Construction Phase Review should be
completed once the project construction is
substantially complete. The project has one year
from completion of the project to complete LEED
Certification proceedings, but this should be done
as soon as possible, while project team members
are still available to provide documentation and
clarifications.
In order to accelerate the review process, teams
are advised to communicate their anticipated
submittal dates to the USGBC so that the USGBC
will have adequate reviewers on hand to review
documentation and submittals.
B. Who completes the Construction Phase
Review?
The Project Administrator or Project
Team Manager will submit the project for
the Construction Phase review, however all
construction team members are responsible
for completing their LEED Letter Templates,
uploading supporting documentation files and
assisting the Project Administrator in gathering
the information necessary for the application
package. Documentation guidance for specific
Prerequisites and Credits is provided in the
Appendices.
C. What is the Construction Phase Review?
All LEED Prerequisites and Credits are marked
on the LEED Online Credit Scorecard & Status
page with either a yellow letter ‘d’ or an orange
letter ‘c’ next to them. This is to help you
understand which Credits will be reviewed in the
Design Phase Review (marked ‘d’) and in the
Construction Phase Review (marked ‘c’).

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

46

D. How is the Construction Phase Review
submitted?
The project team should be completing
documentation throughout the construction
process. Documentation should consist of
photos, product data, letters from manufacturers,
calculations and other information to demonstrate
LEED criteria are met through construction. In
addition, team members must complete their
LEED Letter Templates for each Prerequisite or
Credit that they are assigned to.
All attempted Construction Phase Prerequisites
and Credits must be marked as complete if they
are to be attempted. The ‘Submit’ button will not
appear on the Credit Scorecard & Status page
until this is done.
Some teams prefer to have individual
members mark their own Prerequisites and
Credits as complete to indicate to the Project
Administrator that they are ready for an
internal review. Other teams prefer to leave the
Prerequisites and Credits marked as incomplete
until the Project Administrator has reviewed
them and marked them as complete to indicate
to that team member that they are done. It is a
matter of team preference and either way will
work. Discuss the best communication strategy
for your team early in the process, so that all
team members may receive timely and valuable
feedback.
The entire package and process for the
Construction Phase Review should be as
follows:
i.			 Under the Credit Scorecard & Status tab,
team members click on each individual
Prerequisite and Credits pursued to access
the LEED Letter Templates and to upload
supporting documentation files specific to
those Prerequisites and Credits.
ii.		 Under the Credit Scorecard & Status tab, the
Project Administrator clicks on each individual
Prerequisite and Credit pursued to access the
completed LEED Letter Templates and to
review uploaded documentation specific to
those Credits and Prerequisites.

iii.		 For each Construction Phase Prerequisite
and Credit the Project Administrator or
team member must click on the ‘Mark as
Complete’ button before submitting project
documents for the Construction Phase
Review.
iv.		 A green check mark will appear next to each
Prerequisite and Credit marked as Complete
on the Credit Scorecard & Status page.
v.

Once the Review has been accepted, the
Project Administrator will need to click on
the ‘Update Credit Status’ button to access
the Construction Phase Prerequisites and
Credits. If any Design Phase Prerequisite or
Credit has changed, the Project Administrator
may indicate so at this time. Credits may be
marked ‘Unchanged’, ‘Changed – Please
Reevaluate’ or ‘Changed – No Longer
Attempting’ from a drop-down menu on the
right.

vi. Once the Design Phase Credits have been
marked appropriately (‘Unchanged’ is the
default), the Project Administrator should
click on the button ‘Click Here to Continue
Certification Process’.
vii. Once all documentation is complete, the
Project Administrator will submit the
package to the USGBC for a Construction
Phase Review. Payment may be rendered
immediately by Credit card, or by check.
viii. Fees for the Construction Phase Reviews
may be found here: http://www.usgbc.org/
DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=65#fees
ix. Once payment is rendered, received and
processed, the USGBC will commence
reviewing the Construction Phase application.
Within 4-6 weeks the team should receive
a preliminary response on design Credit
strategies and documentation from the
USGBC with Requests for Clarification.
x.		 Requests for Clarification will be sent to
the Project Administrator in a PDF report
document as well as posted individually on
each Prerequisite’s and Credit’s individual
page.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

47

xi.		 Prerequisites and Credits will be marked
‘Anticipated’ or ‘Pending Clarification’
on the LEED Scorecard and Status page.
Team members have 30 days to respond by
clarifying documentation and narratives,
providing additional documentation or by
withdrawing the Credit. Teams may request
more time if needed.
xii.		 The USGBC will review the updated
Prerequisite and Credit Documentation and
provide a final report within 2-4 weeks.
Construction Phase Prerequisites and Credits
will be marked as ‘Anticipated’ or ‘Denied’
at this time. Denied Credits may be appealed,
if desired. As they are required, denied
Prerequisites must be appealed.
xiii. The Project Administrator must either
click on the ‘Accept Review’ or ‘Appeal
Review’ button to indicate to the USGBC how
the team wishes to proceed.
xiv. Appeals cost $500 per Prerequisite or
Credit. Depending on the complexity of the
appeal, this can add an additional 2-4 weeks
onto the construction Phase Review timeline.
xv. Once the Review has been accepted, the
Project Administrator will receive an offer
of Certification – a short form must be
completed to indicate that the project team
accepts the level of Certification offered by
the USGBC for the project.
xvi. The project has officially been LEED Certified.
			 The project will receive a plaque and
			 certificates for team members.

LEED Certification | Steps to LEED Certification

48

Specification
Title
of Important
Stuff & Things
Guidance
Subtitle of More
Construction
Progress
Things
Reporting
and Stuffs
and Documentation
One of the hardest challenges to obtaining a LEED Certification is ensuring that the sustainable elements you
incorporate into your design are implemented on the job site. Specifications are one of the primary vehicles for
conveying to your construction team the importance of meeting LEED performance criteria and documentation
requirements. In addition to that, specifications that clearly outline LEED performance criteria and documentation
requirements will assist in accurate cost estimation and bidding.
The single most important thing to remember about sustainable building specifications is that you cannot limit your
reference to LEED and the inherent performance criteria and documentation requirements to just one specification
section in Division 1 (i.e. “Sustainable Design Requirements”). In addition to this section in Division 1, you must
integrate the sustainable design requirements into the entire set of specifications. Most subcontractors will not read
the entire set; they may only focus on the sections specific to their trade. If you isolate the LEED information in just
one section, the odds are you are not going to see a successful LEED project Certified at the level you aspire to.
Specifications are a critical component to successfully implementing LEED requirements on the job site. In addition
to providing guidance as to the performance criteria for building products and materials, the specifications should
clearly indicate what documentation submittals look like and which LEED Credits should be documented in each
spec section. The more detailed the specifications are about LEED requirements and documentation expectations, the
easier it will be for the General Contractor to manage the process on the job site.
Project Owners may wish to require an early submittal of Construction Waste Management and Indoor Air Quality
Management Plans by the contractor to ensure these requirements are understood and implemented from groundbreaking onward. Project Owners may also wish to require LEED progress reports in addition to normal project
progress reports. Contract documents can require that Construction Waste Management, recycled content,
regional materials and other materials Credits be tracked consistently and updated reports provided at regular
intervals. Some project Owners even tie these progress reports to payments, to ensure that the proper documentation
is collected in a timely manner. It is extremely difficult to obtain material documentation once sub-contractors have
been compensated and their contracts closed out.
An internal LEED coordinator should review the project specifications to ensure that they reflect all LEED requirements
associated with the targeted LEED strategy. Having detailed and thorough documents will assist General Contractors
and Sub-contractors estimate project costs and bid on the project accurately, keeping project costs in line without
having to sacrifice sustainability later in the Value Engineering process. The LEED coordinator should also participate
in any pre-bid conferences to assist in clarifying the project’s LEED strategy and sustainability goals.

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

49

Two excellent resources for finding good, baseline green and LEED specifications may be found online. You will find
excellent examples for integrating LEED Performance Criteria on these sites.
1. BuildingGreen
This website includes free access to four critical specification sections relevant to LEED as well as very useful advice
about integrating LEED into the entire spec set. Project Architects or Specification writers may download these
complete sections and amend them to suit the specific project’s LEED strategy.
www.buildinggreen.com/guidespecs/
These guideline specifications were set up to be adapted to new development, retrofits, and maintenance as
needed. The following are organized into four Division 01 sections:
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

2. Whole Building Design Guide
This website includes access to some free resources (such as the Unified Facilities Guide Specifications, the Veterans
Administration Master Specifications and the Federal Green Guide for Specifiers) as well as to those that must be
purchased (such as MasterSpec). www.wbdg.org
The information that follows provides guidance for Recommended LEED Submittal Requirements. This section is
intended to augment your Specifications to ensure that you receive the documentation needed from the General
Contractor to achieve Construction Phase LEED Prerequisites and Credits.

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

50

Division 01 – GENERAL PROGRESS
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. Preliminary Documentation
The General Contractor must provide the following within 60 days of award:
• Construction Waste Management Plan
• Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
• LEED Kick-off Meeting Attendance (Sign-in sheet)
B. Construction Progress Documentation
The General Contractor is required to designate a LEED Accredited Professional (LEED-AP) to manage the LEED
documentation process during construction activity.
The General Contractor must provide LEED calculation updates and documentation progress reports monthly. These
progress reports will be required for payment. Monthly updates must include calculations for the following when
applicable to your project’s LEED strategy:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Construction Waste Management
Indoor Air Quality Management
Materials Reuse
Recycled Content
Regional Materials
Rapidly Renewable Materials
Certified Wood
Low Emitting Materials

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

51

GENERAL CONTRACTOR’S LEED PROGRESS REPORT COVER SHEET FOR OPM PROJECTS
The General Contractor MUST include this LEED Documentation Checklist with all monthly progress reports to OPM. The Architect is
responsible for customizing this form so that it is applicable to the specific project.

This submittal contains (to be provided within 60 days of award):
Construction Waste Management Plan
Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
LEED Kick‐off Meeting Attendance (Sign‐in sheet)
This submittal contains a MONTHLY UPDATE:
Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan
Photos of the Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan implementation are included
Construction Waste Management
Calculations to date are included
Dump tickets are included
Receipts for materials accepted by a salvaging business or organization are included
Receipts for materials accepted at recycling facilities are included
Indoor Air Quality Management
The IAQ Management Plan has been reviewed with all mechanical subcontractors
Photos of the implementation of the IAQ Management Plan are included
MERV 8 filter product numbers are included
Materials Reuse
Calculations to date are included
Receipts for salvaged materials used in the project are included
Recycled Content
Calculations to date are included
Product data or letters from the manufacturer verifying pre‐consumer and post‐
consumer recycled content are included
Regional Materials
Calculations to date are included
Letters from manufacturer indicating location of raw or salvaged materials are
included
Letters from manufacturer indicating location of manufacture are included
Yahoo or Google maps indicating distance from above locations to project site are
included
Rapidly Renewable Materials
Calculations to date are included
Product data or letters from the manufacturer verifying percent of rapidly
renewable content are included
Certified Wood
Calculations to date are included
FSC Chain of Custody Certificates are included
Low Emitting Adhesives, Sealants, Paints and Coatings
MSDS indicating the VOC content in g/L for all of the above materials are provided
Low Emitting Carpet
CRI Green Label Plus Certification numbers are provided
Low Emitting Composite Wood and Agrifiber

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

52

Product Data or MSDS verifying no added urea formaldehyde in composite wood
and agrifiber products are provided

Submitted by (signature):

______________________________________

Submitted by (print):

______________________________________

Submitted on

______________________________________

(date):

The above party is the General Contractor’s on‐site LEED documentation coordinator
The above party is designated a LEED Accredited Professional by the United States Green
Building Council

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

53

Division 02 – EXISTING CONDITIONS
For Sustainable Sites Prerequisite 1, the Contractor is responsible for implementing the Construction Activity Pollution
prevention plan, also called Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan.
The General Contractor is responsible for providing and implementing the Construction Waste Management Plan. All
demolition debris must be included in project calculations. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons)
or volume (cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
• Documentation of steps taken to prevent
sedimentation and erosion on the project site, including narrative description and at least one (1) photograph
taken on at least two (2) occasions of measures included in the Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan
• Overall Construction Waste Management Plan
indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion and targeted percentage of diversion
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

54

Division 03 - Concrete
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings
applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all recycled content products, the Contractor
must provide:
•
•

Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the
total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost

C. For all regionally manufactured products assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
•
•
•

Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 mile radius
of project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of
the finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the
total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.

D. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

55

Division 04 – MASONRY
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing
membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all recycled content products, the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer
indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of
the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost
C. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 mile radius of
project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
D. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

56

Division 05 – METALS
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings
applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all recycled content products, the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost
C. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 mile radius
of project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
D. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan
indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion and targeted percentage of diversion.
The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume (cubic yards) so long as the method of
tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

57

Division 06 – WOOD, PLASTICS, and COMPOSITES
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing
membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all composite wood products (i.e. Oriented Strand Board, Medium Density Fiberboard, particle board,
plywood, agrifiber panels, strawboard, wheatboard, etc.), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer that states ‘No Added Urea-Formaldehyde’
• Product data or MSDS stating the VOC content of any laminate or veneer adhesives in grams per liter
C. For all recycled content products, the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
D. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 mile radius of
project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost
E. For reused or salvaged wood, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the vendor or source of the product and provide its market value or the market value for
equivalent products if purchased new
• The total percentage of reused or salvaged content of the project as a whole, based on cost of reused or
salvaged materials and products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor
may use 45% of the total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

58

F. For FSC-Certified wood, the Contractor must
provide:
• Chain of Custody Certificates for wood products (i.e. dimensional lumber, wood trim, blocking, veneer) that
are certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
• Documentation that a minimum of 50% of all wood products by cost are FSC-Certified
G. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

59

Division 07 – THERMAL and MOISTURE PROTECTION
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing
membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all recycled content products (e.g. recycled cotton batt insulation), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
C. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 miles radius
of project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost
D. For rapidly renewable materials (e.g. soy-based foam insulation), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating the source of the rapidly renewable materials and the
percentage of rapidly renewable material contained in the finished product or assembly
• The total percentage of rapidly renewable content of the project as a whole, based on the cost of rapidly
renewable materials and products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor
may use 45% of the total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
E. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

60

Division 08 – DOORS and WINDOWS
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
• 01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
• 01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
• 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
• 01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements
LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site, and within or penetrating the weather proofing
membrane, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all recycled content products (e.g. metal doors; curtain wall systems including aluminum, glass), the
Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
C. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 miles radius
of project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
D. For reused or salvaged materials, fixtures or hardware, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the vendor or source of the product and provide its market value or the market value for
equivalent products if purchased new
• The total percentage of reused or salvaged content of the project as a whole, based on cost of reused or
salvaged materials and products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor
may use 45% of the total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
E. For FSC-Certified wood (e.g. door veneers), the Contractor must provide:
• Chain of Custody Certificates for wood products (i.e. dimensional lumber, wood trim, blocking, veneer) that
are certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
• Documentation that a minimum of 50% of all wood products by cost are FSC-Certified

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

61

F. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

62

Division 09 – FINISHES
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site, the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For carpet systems, the Contractor must provide:
• Product data including MSDS for carpet adhesives that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content
for the product in grams per liter and
• Product data or statement from the manufacturer that provides the Green Label Plus Certification number for
the carpet product
C. For resilient flooring, the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer that states that the product is FloorScore Certified
D. For all composite wood products (i.e. Oriented Strand Board, Medium Density Fiberboard, particle board,
plywood, agrifiber panels, strawboard, wheatboard, etc.), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer that states ‘No Added Urea-Formaldehyde’
• Product data or MSDS stating the VOC content of any laminate or veneer adhesives in grams per liter
E. For all recycled content products (e.g. gypsum board, carpet, ceiling tiles), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
F. For all regionally manufactured products, assemblies and materials, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the manufacturer that states the location of manufacture (must be within a 500 mile radius of
project site) and the location of harvest/extraction/salvage or mining for all materials or components of the
finished product or assembly (must also be within a 500 mile radius of the project site)
• Evidence of proximity of materials harvest/extraction/salvage/mining and product manufacture to the project
site in the form of Yahoo or Google Maps, or equivalent
• The total percentage of regional content of the project as a whole, based on cost of regional materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

63

G. For rapidly renewable materials (e.g. cork, bamboo, soy, linoleum, wool, cotton, etc.), the Contractor must
provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating the source of the rapidly renewable materials and the
percentage of rapidly renewable material contained in the finished product or assembly
• The total percentage of rapidly renewable content of the project as a whole, based on the cost of rapidly
renewable materials and products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor
may use 45% of the total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
H. For reused or salvaged materials, fixtures or hardware, the Contractor must provide:
• Letter from the vendor or source of the product and provide its market value or the market value for
equivalent products if purchased new
• The total percentage of reused or salvaged content of the project as a whole, based on cost of reused or
salvaged materials and products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor
may use 45% of the total construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
I. For FSC-Certified wood, the Contractor must provide:
• Chain of Custody Certificates for wood products (i.e. dimensional lumber, wood trim, blocking, veneer) that
are certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
• Documentation that a minimum of 50% of all wood products by cost are FSC-Certified
J. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

64

Division 10 – SPECIALTIES
Where submittals are required to demonstrate compliance with LEED requirements, an additional set must be
provided to the Architect’s LEED coordinator for review.
RELATED SECTIONS
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

LEED DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTALS
A. For all adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings applied on site and within the weather proofing membrane
(including touch-ups), the Contractor must provide:
• Material Safety and Data Sheets (MSDS) that state the Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) content for the
product in grams per liter (g/L)
B. For all composite wood products (i.e. Oriented Strand Board, Medium Density Fiberboard, particle board,
plywood, agrifiber panels, strawboard, wheatboard; used for countertop substrates, backer board, etc.), the
Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer that states ‘No Added Urea-Formaldehyde’
• Product data or MSDS stating the VOC content of any laminate or veneer adhesives in grams per liter
C. For all recycled content products (including lockers, toilet partitions), the Contractor must provide:
• Product data or letter from the manufacturer indicating both Pre-Consumer (or Post-Industrial) and
Post-Consumer Recycled Content as a percentage of the whole product or material
• The total percentage of recycled content of the project as a whole, based on cost of recycled materials and
products as a fraction of the Total Materials Cost for Divisions 2-10. The Contractor may use 45% of the total
construction cost for Divisions 2-10 as a default Total Materials Cost.
D. For construction waste management, the Contractor must provide:
• Construction Waste Management Plan indicating materials to be diverted from landfill, methods of diversion
and targeted percentage of diversion. The General Contractor may track waste by weight (tons) or volume
(cubic yards) so long as the method of tracking is consistent throughout the project.
• Monthly reports from a third-party waste hauler/recycler or
• Monthly reports of waste sorted on site and diverted by the Contractor as a percentage of total waste and
• Receipts for all recycled and salvaged waste accepted and
• Dump tickets for all waste that is not diverted from landfill

LEED Certification | Specification Guidance

65

LEEDof
Title
General
Important
Stuff & Things
Resources
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
All websites represent free resources. Any mention of products or services is for informational purposes only. Inclusion
in this Resources chapter does not imply endorsement or approval by the District of Columbia Department of Real
Estate Services.
This list is not intended to be exhaustive, merely a representation of various products, materials and sources of
information to get LEED project teams started. New sustainable products, materials, services and technologies enter
the market every day and may not be included in this Guidebook because they were not available at the time of
publication or were unknown to the authors of this Guidebook.
DC Green Building Resources
Green DC Green Building Webpage: green.dc.gov/green/cwp/view,a,1231,q,460953.asp
DC Green Building Act: www.dccouncil.washington.dc.us/images/00001/20061218152322.pdf or green.dc.gov/
green/lib/green/pdfs/GreenBuilding_act06.pdf
Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) Green Building Act At-a-Glance Fact Sheet: dcra.dc.gov/dcra/
lib/dcra/information/publications/green_building.pdf
District Department of the Environment (DDOE): ddoe.dc.gov/ddoe/site/default.asp
Greening DC Building Codes: www.imt.org/codes/
Greening the Washington Metropolitan Region’s Built Environment (Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments): www.mwcog.org/store/item.asp?PUBLICATION_ID=304
Greening Federal Facilities: www1.eere.energy.gov/femp/pdfs/29267-0.pdf
Sustainable Business Network of Washington (SBNOW): www.sbnow.org/template/index.cfm
LEED Online and USGBC Website Tutorials
At the time of publication of this Guidebook, there are at least two LEED Online tutorials available for free online.
These can be located by using an internet search engine and the phrase “LEED Online tutorial”.
LEED Online Tutorial: www.vimeo.com/346688
Using the USGBC Website Effectively Tutorial: www.vimeo.com/346954
Sustainable Building Essential Websites (commercial and residential)
1. U.S. Department of Energy office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) Building Technologies Program: www1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/
2. Advanced Buildings: Eco-Friendly Building
Techniques for earth friendly & energy efficient construction: www.advancedbuildings.org

LEED Certification | LEED General Resources

66

3. The Center for the Built Environment:
www.cbe.berkeley.edu
4. Whole Building Design Guide (created for Federal facilities, but offers a wealth of invaluable resources to any
sustainable design team): www.wbdg.org
5. Mechanical Contractor’s Guide to LEED:
www.greencontractors.us/how/
6. Southface: www.southface.org
7. U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs Sustainable
Design and Energy Reduction Manual:
www.va.gov/facmgt/standard/energy.asp
8. BuildingGreen: www.buildinggreen.com
LEED Reference Documents:
www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=1762
LEED Pubic Policies Searchable Database:
www.usgbc.org/PublicPolicy/SearchPublicPolicies.aspx?PageID=1776
LEED Specifications:
Two excellent resources for finding good, baseline specifications may be found online:
Whole Building Design Guide
This website includes access to some free resources (such as the Unified Facilities Guide Specifications, the Veterans
Administration Master Specifications and the Federal Green Guide for Specifiers) as well as to those that must be
purchased (such as MasterSpec). www.wbdg.org/sitemap.php#ps
BuildingGreen
This website includes free access to four critical specification sections relevant to LEED as well as very useful advice
about integrating LEED into the entire spec set: www.buildinggreen.com/guidespecs/index.cfm
•
•
•
•

01 74 19 Construction Waste Management
01 81 09 Testing for Indoor Air Quality
01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements
01 91 00 General Commissioning Requirements

Government
AIA Local Green Building Incentive programs:
greenerbuildings.com/files/document/LLgreenincentives(5-19).pdf
Environmental Law Institute’s Municipal Green Building Policies: www.elistore.org/reports_detail.asp?ID=11295
Sustainlane open-source knowledge base includes 110 best practice documents and a secure directory of participating
government officials from over 450 cities, counties and states: www.sustainlane.us

LEED Certification | LEED General Resources

67

Glossary
Title
of Important
Stuff & Things
Subtitle of More Things and Stuffs
Alternative Compliance Approach – The USGBC can be flexible in how a team documents and fulfills Credit
requirements. For example, a project team may be able to fulfill the necessary Credit requirements or meet the Credit
intent through an alternative yet equally applicable pathway. In this case, a team member must simply write a short
paragraph within the template narrative box describing any additional comments or notes for special circumstances
regarding the project’s Credit approach. Project teams may want to submit a Credit Interpretation Request if they
are in doubt that an alternative approach will be acceptable to the USGBC.
Anticipated – Following Precertification and design reviews, USGBC reviewers will mark Prerequisites and Credits as
‘Anticipated,’ ‘Request for Clarification,’ or ‘Denied’. Those Prerequisites and Credits with sufficient documentation
to prove that the project team has met the Credit’s intent and requirements are marked as ‘anticipated’ and need no
further explanation at that point of the phase review. Credits are not ‘Awarded’ until the project is complete.
Appeals - Denied Credits may be appealed, if desired. Denied Prerequisites must be appealed to achieve certification
at any level. Appeals cost $500 per Prerequisite or Credit. Depending on the complexity of the appeal, this can add an
additional 2-4 weeks onto the Design Phase Review timeline.
Construction Phase Review - All LEED Prerequisites and Credits are marked on the LEED Online Credit Scorecard
& Status page with either a yellow letter ‘d’ or an orange letter ‘c’ next to them. The Construction Phase Review
should be completed once the project construction is substantially complete. The project has one year to complete
Certification proceedings, but this should be done as soon as possible, while project team members are still available
to provide documentation and clarifications. The Project Administrator or Project Team Manager will submit the
project for the Construction Phase review, however all construction team members are responsible for completing
their LEED Letter Templates, uploading supporting documentation files and assisting the Project Administrator
in gathering the information necessary for the application package. If any design phase ‘anticipated’ Credits have
changed than the project team must submit additional documentation to maintain continued compliance. Once the
USGBC has received your complete design phase application and fee, the USGBC will formally rule on the entire
application. Anticipated Credits that have not changed will be marked as “achieved.”
Credit – The USGBC has different rating systems in order to maintain applicability for individual projects. Credits
are the building blocks of the point systems. Credits may vary in their point value within each rating system used to
address site selection, water savings, energy efficiency, materials and resources, and indoor environmental quality.
There are minimum levels of Credits necessary in order to obtain certification at various levels (e.g. Certified, Silver,
Gold, and Platinum).
Credit Synergies - The USGBC uses the term Credit synergies to refer to the combination of strategies that span
multiple Credits to achieve a sum greater than its parts.
Credit Interpretation Requests – CIRs should be obtained when it is not clear that a desirable, proposed, or
planned strategy will comply with a Credit’s requirements. CIRs cannot be used to seek variances, changes in, or
exceptions to the existing language of Credit requirements and the quantitative thresholds they include. Before
submitting a CIR, check the USGBC’s online resource for previous CIRs (one must have a site user account in order to
do this). Prior CIR’s that address your inquiry may be used for Credit documentation of another project. The inquiry
should include only essential project strategy and background information and should be presented in the context of
the Credit intent. No attachments are permitted. See Guidelines for CIR customers: http://www.usgbc.org/showfile.
aspx?documentid=1510

LEED Certification | Glossary

68

Denied – For each review, Prerequisites and Credits will be marked as ‘Anticipated’ or ‘Denied’. Prerequisites and
Credits which still have not demonstrated sufficient documentation of completed requirements following both the
initial review and requests for clarification, will be marked as ‘denied.’ Denied Credits may be appealed, if desired.
Denied Prerequisites must be appealed to achieve certification at any level. Appeals cost $500 per Prerequisite or
Credit. Depending on the complexity of the appeal, this can add an additional 2-4 weeks onto the Design Phase
Review timeline.
Design Phase Review - All LEED Prerequisites and Credits are marked on the LEED Online Credit Scorecard &
Status page with either a yellow letter ‘d’ or an orange letter ‘c’ next to them. Credits marked ‘d’ may be deferred
until the Construction Phase Review if the compliance strategy is not clear or adequate supporting documentation
is not available yet. The Project Administrator or Project Team Manager will submit the project for the Design
Phase review, however all team members (design disciplines and Owner) are responsible for completing their LEED
Letter Templates, uploading supporting documentation files and assisting the Project Administrator in gathering
the information necessary for the Project Narrative, the Project Summary and the General Documents. Once the
USGBC has received your complete design phase application and fee, the USGBC will formally rule by designating
Credits as either ‘Anticipated’ or ‘Denied.’
Documentation – Documentation may consist of the Project Narrative, the Project Summary, General
Documents, cut sheets, completed templates, photos, etc. Proper documentation is dependent upon the submittal
requirement of each individual Credit. Refer to the USGBC reference guide for the appropriate documentation
required.
Exemplary Performance – Some Credits allow for a project team to achieve an extra point for illustrating
substantially and quantifiably higher environmental benefits to that Credit’s requirements.
Expedited Permitting - If you are seeking expedited permitting from the DC Department of Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs (DCRA), you may be required to submit your project for Precertification in the Design Development
phase. Expedited permitting allows for project teams to begin construction sooner, saving time and expenses
associated with lengthier permitting processes.
General Documents - site plans, floor plans, sections and elevations or renderings (as available). The documents
must be submitted to the USGBC in conjunction with a Project Narrative and the Design Phase Review package.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GHGs) - The gases present in the earth’s atmosphere which maintain the near-surface
global temperatures through the known greenhouse effect.
LEED Letter Templates – Teams members are assigned specific roles and may fill out, make changes to and save the
LEED Letter Templates for any Prerequisite or Credit also assigned to their role. Prerequisites and Credits should be
hyperlinked to their own pages. Team members should review their Letter Templates as soon as possible so that they
are aware of Performance Criteria and Documentation responsibilities necessary to demonstrate that the project
design meets LEED requirements.
LEED Online – Online portal for LEED information, resources, and support for project documentation. Website where
project team members manage projects details, upload Credit templates, view and submit Credit Interpretation
Requests as well as view and respond to reviewer comments.
LEED Project Team Manager - The Project Team Manager role shares the same access to the project site on LEED
Online as the Project Administrator. The Project Team Manager must receive an invitation to join the project site on
LEED Online, must accept the invitation and join the project, and must be assigned to the Project Team Manager role
by the Project Administrator.
LEED Reviewers – Reviewers may be architects, landscape architects, MEP Engineers, contractors, and employees of
the USGBC, all of whom may review documentation and provide feedback for project certification.

LEED Certification | Glossary

69

LEED Scorecard – A summary of a project’s Credits marked as ‘yes,’ ‘maybe,’ or ‘no’. The scorecard should be
used during the Sustainable Design Charrette to help teams organize, review, and target Credits and as well as
continually update it in order to evaluate each Credit’s status. The LEED Scorecard should be submitted with general
documentation for Precertification in which each Credit is either marked as a ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Performance Criteria – Standards specified as requirements for each Credit and Prerequisite. Team members should
review their Letter Templates as soon as possible so that they are aware of Performance Criteria and Documentation
responsibilities necessary to demonstrate that the project design meets LEED requirements.
Precertification – Marketing a building’s image as one that has implemented sustainable strategies into its design,
provides owners an opportunity to promote the building more successfully. If you are designing a building under the
LEED for Core and Shell (LEED-CS) Rating System, you can apply for Precertification as soon as your LEED Strategy is
defined. Typically this is possible as early as the Design Development Phase; however some project teams may opt to
wait until the Construction Documents phase to submit.
Prerequisite – Mandatory performance criteria. A project will not achieve LEED certification at any level without
demonstrating compliance for all Prerequisites. Denied Prerequisites must be appealed.
Project Access Code – If you are adding a new project and have the Project Access Code, you may enter it at the
bottom of the project access page in order to join a project team on LEED Online.
Project Administrator – The Project Administrator is, by default, the person who registers the project with the
USGBC, however it can be changed to any team member by sending a written request to the LEED support staff
(leedinfo@usgbc.org). The Project Administrator can also assign the role Project Team Manager to other team
member(s); this role shares the same access to the project site on LEED Online as the Project Administrator.
The key responsibilities of the Project Administrator:
1. Registers the project under the appropriate rating system
2. Invites team members to join the project site on LEED Online
3. Assigns team members to project roles (once they have accepted the invitation and joined the project on LEED
Online)
4. Can assign any team member(s) to the ‘Project Team Manager’ role so that another team member can have 		
same capabilities as Project Administrator
5. Assigns Prerequisites and Credits to team members/roles
6. Can mark any Prerequisite or Credit as complete or incomplete
7. Can upload documentation under any Prerequisite or Credit
8. Can save LEED Letter Templates under any Prerequisite or Credit
9. Can change the project summary details (information provided at time of registration)
10. Uploads plans, sections, elevations, renderings, photos, general documents and the project narrative before
submitting documentation for the Design Phase Review
11. Submits documentation and payment for the Design Phase Review
12. Submits revised documentation responding to the Requests for Clarification in the initial Design Phase Review
13. Confirms Credits ‘Anticipated’ in the Design Phase Review immediately prior to submitting documentation for
the Construction Phase Review
14. Submits documentation and payment for the Construction Phase Review
15. Submits revised documentation responding to the Requests for Clarification in the initial Construction Phase 		
Review
EVERY TEAM MEMBER is responsible for uploading his or her own documentation. The Administrator role is to assist
and to manage, but not to complete documentation for the team.

LEED Certification | Glossary

70

Project Narrative – The project narrative is a 1-3 page document that describes the overall project and highlights up
to three environmental achievements. This document exists to give reviewers a big-picture perspective on the project’s
sustainable design strategy and how the building (or multiple buildings) works. There may be multiple reviewers
examining different components of your project’s LEED documentation (for example, an MEP engineer may review
MEP Credits, while an Architect may review architectural Credits). Without a Project Narrative, the reviewers might
have a hard time grasping the project in its entirety and would not be able to review the project accurately. It can be
revised before the Construction Phase Review if any of the information changes. The information in the Project
Summary must match the information in all Prerequisite and Credit documentation or there will be Requests for
Clarification from the LEED Reviewers.
Requests for Clarification – Once payment is provided for a Precertification, design or construction phase submittal,
the USGBC will commence reviewing the application. Within 4-6 weeks the team should receive a preliminary
response on Credit strategies and documentation from the USGBC with Requests for Clarification. Requests for
Clarification will be sent to the Project Administrator in a PDF report document as well as posted individually on each
Prerequisite’s and Credit’s individual page. The USGBC will review the updated Prerequisite and Credit Documentation
and provide a final report within 2-4 weeks Prerequisites and Credits will be marked as ‘Anticipated’ or ‘Denied’ at
this time. Denied Credits may be appealed, if desired. Denied Prerequisites must be appealed.
Site User Account – You will need a site user account through the USGBC to register a project. This is free and only
requires that site users provide basic contact information.
Sustainable Design Charrette – It is essential that the entire project team (owner, architect, civil engineer, MEP
engineer, LEED coordinator, etc.) sit down as early in the design process as possible and discuss the sustainable
design strategy for the project. This ‘charrette’ may last a half-day or an entire day, and it provides the team with the
necessary level of a) understanding of LEED requirements, b) commitment to LEED strategy and c) accountability to
the team, to ensure a successfully LEED Certified project.
Sustainable Design Coordinator – This person supports the design and operations of a sustainable building and
typically is the LEED Project Administrator or LEED Project Team Manager on LEED Online. This person may also
play the role of outside consultant to the owner or project team. The coordinator takes on the role of leading the
sustainable design charrette and overseeing the LEED process through all phases.
Update Credit Status – Once the Review has been accepted, the Project Administrator will need to click on the
‘Update Credit Status’ button to access the Construction Phase Prerequisites and Credits. If any Design Phase
Prerequisite or Credit has changed, the Project Administrator may indicate so at this time. Credits may be marked
‘Unchanged’, ‘Changed – Please Reevaluate’ or ‘Changed – No Longer Attempting’ from a drop-down menu on the
right.
Value Engineering – Value Engineering (VE) is a systematic method to improve the “value” of goods and services by
using an examination of function. Value, as defined, is the ratio of function to cost. Value can therefore be increased
by either improving the function or reducing the cost. Unfortunately in the built environment, many exercises in
Value Engineering reduce both cost and function. A sustainable design strategy that achieves many Credits at once
may appear to be costly as a single line item, but if it is eliminated in the Value Engineering process, it may cost you
eligibility for your LEED Credits as well as incur some unforeseen costs, cancelling out any savings you hoped to
achieve in VE.

LEED Certification | Glossary

71

